THE LOOM OF YEARS


    In the light of the silent stars that shine on the struggling sea,
    In the weary cry of the wind and the whisper of flower and tree,
    Under the breath of laughter, deep in the tide of tears,
    I hear the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.

    The leaves of the winter wither and sink in the forest mould
    To colour the flowers of April with purple and white and gold:
    Light and scent and music die and are born again
    In the heart of a grey-haired woman who wakes in a world of pain.

    The hound, the fawn and the hawk, and the doves that croon and coo,
    We are all one woof of the weaving and the one warp threads us through,
    One flying cloud on the shuttle that carries our hopes and fears
    As it goes thro' the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.

    The crosiers of the fern, and the crown, the crown of the rose,
    Pass with our hearts to the Silence where the wings of music close,
    Pass and pass to the Timeless that never a moment mars,
    Pass and pass to the Darkness that made the suns and stars.

    Has the soul gone out in the Darkness? Is the dust sealed from sight?
    Ah, hush, for the woof of the ages returns thro' the warp of the night!
    Never that shuttle loses one thread of our hopes and fears,
    As It comes thro' the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.

    O, woven in one wide Loom thro' the throbbing weft of the whole,
    One in spirit and flesh, one in body and soul,
    The leaf on the winds of autumn, the bird in its hour to die,
    The heart in its muffled anguish, the sea in its mournful cry,

    One with the flower of a day, one with the withered moon,
    One with the granite mountains that melt into the noon,
    One with the dream that triumphs beyond the light of the spheres,
    We come from the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.




IN THE HEART OF THE WOODS


    I

    The Heart of the woods, I hear it, beating, beating afar,
    In the glamour and gloom of the night, in the light of the rosy star,
    In the cold sweet voice of the bird, in the throb of the flower-soft
        sea!...
    For the Heart of the woods is the Heart of the world and the
        Heart of Eternity,
    Ay, and the burning passionate Heart of the heart in you and me.

    Love of my heart, love of the world, linking the golden moon
    With the flowery moths that flutter thro' the scented leaves of June,
    And the mind of man with beauty, and youth with the dreaming night
    Of stars and flowers and waters and breasts of glimmering white,
    And streaming hair of fragrant dusk and flying limbs of lovely light;

    Life of me, life of me, shining in sun and cloud and wind,
    In the dark eyes of the fawn and the eyes of the hound behind,
    In the leaves that lie in the seed unsown, and the dream of the
        babe unborn,
    O, flaming tides of my blood, as you flow thro' flower and root
        and thorn,
    I feel you burning the boughs of night to kindle the fires of morn.

    Soul of me, soul of me, yearning wherever a lavrock sings,
    Or the crimson gloom is winnowed by the whirr of wood-doves' wings,
    Or the spray of the foam-bow rustles in the white dawn of the moon,
    And mournful billows moan aloud, _Come soon, soon, soon,
    Come soon, O Death with the Heart of love and the secret of the rune._

    Heart of me, heart of me, heart of me, beating, beating afar,
    In the green gloom of the night, in the light of the rosy star,
    In the cold sweet voice of the bird, in the throb of the flower-soft
        sea!...
    O, the Heart of the woods is the Heart of the world and the
        Heart of Eternity,
    Ay, and the burning passionate Heart of the heart in you and me.


    II

    O, Death will never find us in the heart of the wood,
      The song is in my blood, night and day:
    We will pluck a scented petal from the Rose upon the Rood
      Where Love lies bleeding on the way.
    We will listen to the linnet and watch the waters leap,
      When the clouds go dreaming by,
    And under the wild roses and the stars we will sleep,
      And wander on together, you and I.

    We shall understand the mystery that none has understood,
      We shall know why the leafy gloom is green.
    O, Death will never find us in the heart of the wood
      When we see what the stars have seen!
    We have heard the hidden song of the soft dews falling
      At the end of the last dark sky,
    Where all the sorrows of the world are calling,
      We must wander on together, you and I.

    They are calling, calling, _Away, come away!_
      And we know not whence they call;
    For the song is in our hearts, we hear it night and day,
      As the deep tides rise and fall:
    _O, Death will never find us in the heart of the wood,
      While the hours and the years roll by!_
    We have heard it, we have heard it, but we have not understood,
      We must wander on together, you and I.

    The wind may beat upon us, the rain may blind our eyes,
      The leaves may fall beneath the winter's wing;
    But we shall hear the music of the dream that never dies,
      And we shall know the secret of the Spring.
    We shall know how all the blossoms of evil and of good
      Are mingled in the meadows of the sky;
    And then--if Death can find us in the heart of the wood--
      We shall wander on together, you and I.




ART

(IMITATED FROM DE BANVILLE AND GAUTIER)


    I

    Yes! Beauty still rebels!
    Our dreams like clouds disperse:
      She dwells
    In agate, marble, verse.

    No false constraint be thine!
    But, for right walking, choose
      The fine,
    The strict cothurnus, Muse.

    Vainly ye seek to escape
    The toil! The yielding phrase
      Ye shape
    Is clay, not chrysoprase.

    And all in vain ye scorn
    That seeming ease which ne'er
      Was born
    Of aught but love and care.

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Recall the gods that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky.

    For Beauty still rebels!
    Our dreams like clouds disperse:
      She dwells
    In agate, marble, verse.


    II

    When Beauty from the sea,
    With breasts of whiter rose
      Than we
    Behold on earth, arose.

    Naked thro' Time returned
    The Bliss of Heaven that day,
      And burned
    The dross of earth away.

    Kings at her splendour quailed.
    For all his triple steel
      She haled
    War at her chariot-wheel.

    The rose and lily bowed
    To cast, of odour sweet
      A cloud
    Before her wandering feet.

    And from her radiant eyes
    There shone on soul and sense
      The skies'
    Divine indifference.

    O, mortal memory fond!
    Slowly she passed away
      Beyond
    The curling clouds of day.

    _Return_, we cry, _return_,
    Till in the sadder light
      We learn
    That she was infinite.

    The Dream that from the sea
    With breasts of whiter rose
      Than we
    Behold on earth, arose.


    III

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Becall the dreams that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky;
    And kings that not endure
    In bronze to re-ascend
      Secure
    Until the world shall end.

    Poet, let passion sleep
    Till with the cosmic rhyme
      You keep
    Eternal tone and time,

    By rule of hour and flower,
    By strength of stern restraint
      And power
    To fail and not to faint.

    The task is hard to learn
    While all the songs of Spring
      Return
    Along the blood and sing.

    Yet hear--from her deep skies,
    How Art, for all your pain,
      Still cries
    _Ye must be born again!_

    Reject the wreath of rose,
    Take up the crown of thorn
      That shows
    To-night a child is born.

    The far immortal face
    In chosen onyx fine
      Enchase,
    Delicate line by line.

    Strive with Carrara, fight
    With Parian, till there steal
      To light
    Apollo's pure profile.

    Set the great lucid form
    Free from its marble tomb
      To storm
    The heights of death and doom.

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Recall the gods that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky,




TRIOLET


    Love, awake! Ah, let thine eyes
      Open, clouded with thy dreams.
    Now the shy sweet rosy skies,
      Love, awake. Ah, let thine eyes
    Dawn before the last star dies.
      O'er thy breast the rose-light gleams:
    Love, awake! Ah, let thine eyes
      Open, clouded with thy dreams.




A TRIPLE BALLAD OF OLD JAPAN


    In old Japan, by creek and bay,
      The blue plum-blossoms blow,
    Where birds with sea-blue plumage gay
      Thro' sea-blue branches go:
    Dragons are coiling down below
      Like dragons on a fan;
    And pig-tailed sailors lurching slow
      Thro' streets of old Japan.

    There, in the dim blue death of day
      Where white tea-roses grow,
    Petals and scents are strewn astray
      Till night be sweet enow,
    Then lovers wander whispering low
      As lovers only can,
    Where rosy paper lanterns glow
      Thro' streets of old Japan.

    From Wonderland to Yea-or-Nay
      The junks of Weal-and-Woe
    Dream on the purple water-way
      Nor ever meet a foe;
    Though still, with stiff mustachio
      And crookéd ataghan,
    Their pirates guard with pomp and show
      The ships of old Japan.

    That land is very far away,
      We lost it long ago!
    No fairies ride the cherry spray,
      No witches mop and mow,
    The violet wells have ceased to flow;
      And O, how faint and wan
    The dawn on Fusiyama's snow,
      The peak of old Japan.

    Half smilingly, our hearts delay,
      Half mournfully forego
    The blue fantastic twisted day
      When faithful Konojo,
    For small white Lily Hasu-ko
      Knelt in the Butsudan,
    And her tomb opened to bestrow
      Lilies thro' old Japan.

    There was a game they used to play
      I' the San-ju-san-jen Do,
    They filled a little lacquer tray
      With powders in a row,
    Dry dust of flowers from Tashiro
     To Mount Daimugenzan,
    Dry little heaps of dust, but O
      They breathed of old Japan.

    Then knights in blue and gold array
      Would on their thumbs bestow
    A pinch from every heap and say,
      With many a _hum_ and _ho_,
    What blossoms, nodding to and fro
      For joy of maid or man,
    Conceived the scents that puzzled so
      The brains of old Japan.

    The hundred ghosts have ceased to affray
      The dust of Kyotó,
    Ah yet, what phantom blooms a-sway
      Murmur, a-loft, a-low,
    In dells no scythe of death can mow,
      No power of reason scan,
    O, what Samúrai singers know
      The Flower of old Japan?

    Dry dust of blossoms, dim and gray,
      Lost on the wind? Ah, no,
    Hark, from yon clump of English may,
      A cherub's mocking crow,
    A sudden twang, a sweet, swift throe,
      As Daisy trips by Dan,
    And careless Cupid drops his bow
      And laughs--from old Japan.

    _There, in the dim blue death of day
       Where white tea-roses grow,
    Petals and scents are strewn astray
      Till night be sweet enow,
    Then lovers wander, whispering low,
      As lovers only can,
    Where rosy paper lanterns glow
      Thro' streets of old Japan._




THE SYMBOLIST


    Help me to seek that unknown land!
      I kneel before the shrine.
    Help me to feel the hidden hand
      That ever holdeth mine.

    I kneel before the Word, I kneel
      Before the Cross of flame
    I cry, as thro' the gloom I steal,
      The glory of the Name.

    Help me to mourn, and I shall love;
      What grief is like to mine?
    Crown me with thorn, the stars above
      Shall in the circlet shine!

    The Temple opens wide: none sees
      The love, the dream, the light!
    O, blind and finite, are not these
      Blinding and infinite?

    The veil, the veil is rent: the skies
      Are white with wings of fire,
    Where victim souls triumphant rise
      In torment of desire.

    Help me to seek: I would not find,
      For when I find I know
    I shall have clasped the hollow wind
      And built a house of snow.




HAUNTED IN OLD JAPAN


    Music of the star-shine shimmering o'er the sea
    Mirror me no longer in the dusk of memory:
    Dim and white the rose-leaves drift along the shore.
    Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    _All along the purple creek, lit with silver foam,
    Silent, silent voices, cry no more of home!
    Soft beyond the cherry-trees, o'er the dim lagoon,
    Dawns the crimson lantern of the large low moon._

    We that loved in April, we that turned away
    Laughing ere the wood-dove crooned across the May,
    Watch the withered rose-leaves drift along the shore.
    Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    We the Sons of Reason, we that chose to bride
    Knowledge, and rejected the Dream that we denied,
    We that chose the Wisdom that triumphs for an hour,
    We that let the young love perish like a flower....

    We that hurt the kind heart, we that went astray,
    We that in the darkness idly dreamed of day....
    ... Ah! The dreary rose-leaves drift along the shore.
          Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    Lonely starry faces, wonderful and white,
    Yearning with a cry across the dim sweet night,
    All our dreams are blown a-drift as flowers before a fan,
    All our hearts are haunted in the heart of old Japan.

    Haunted, haunted, haunted--we that mocked and sinned
    Hear the vanished voices wailing down the wind,
    Watch the ruined rose-leaves drift along the shore.
          Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    _All along the purple creek, lit with silver foam,
    Sobbing, sobbing voices, cry no more of home!
    Soft beyond the cherry-trees, o'er the dim lagoon,
    Dawns the crimson lantern of the large low moon._




NECROMANCY

(AFTER THE PROSE OF BAUDELAIRE)


    This necromantic palace, dim and rich,
      Dim as a dream, rich as a reverie,
    I knew it all of old, surely I knew
    This floating twilight tinged with rose and blue,
              This moon-soft carven niche
      Whence the calm marble, wan as memory,
    Slopes to the wine-brimmed bath of cold dark fire
    Perfumed with old regret and dead desire.

    There the soul, slumbering in the purple waves
      Of indolence, dreams of the phantom years,
    Dreams of the wild sweet flower of red young lips
    Meeting and murmuring in the dark eclipse
            Of joy, where pain still craves
      One tear of love to mingle with their tears,
    One passionate welcome ere the wild farewell,
    One flash of heaven across the fires of hell.

       *   *   *   *

    Queen of my dreams, queen of my pitiless dreams,
      Dim idol, moulded of the wild white rose,
    Coiled like a panther in that silken gloom
    Of scented cushions, where the rich hushed room
            Breaks into soft warm gleams,
    As from her slumbrous clouds Queen Venus glows,
    Slowly thine arms up-lift to me, thine eyes
    Meet mine, without communion or surmise.

    Here, at thy feet, I watched, I watched all day
      Night floating in thine eyes, then with my hands
    Covered my face from that dumb cry of pain:
    And when at last I dared to look again
            My heart was far away,
    Wrapt in the fragrant gloom of Eastern lands,
    Under the flower-white stars of tropic skies
    Where soft black floating flowers turned to ... thine eyes.

    I breathe, I breathe the perfume of thine hair:
      Bury in thy deep hair my fevered face,
    Till as to men athirst in desert dreams
    The savour and colour and sound of cool dark streams
            Float round me everywhere,
      And memories float from some forgotten place,
    Fulfilling hopeless eyes with hopeless tears
    And fleeting light of unforgotten years.

    Dim clouds of music in the dim rich hours
      Float to me thro' the twilight of thine hair,
    And sails like blossoms float o'er purple seas,
    And under dark green skies the soft warm breeze
            Washes dark fruit, dark flowers,
      Dark tropic maidens in some island lair
    Couched on the warm sand nigh the creaming foam
    To dream and sing their tawny lovers home.

    Lost in the magic ocean of thine hair
      I find the haven of the heart of song:
    There tired ships rest against the pale red sky!
    And yet again there comes a thin sad cry
            And all the shining air
      Fades, where the tall dark singing seamen throng
    From many generations, many climes,
    Fades, fades, as it has faded many times.

    I hear the sweet cool whisper of the waves!
      Drowned in the slumbrous billows of thine hair,
    I dream as one that sinks thro' passionate hours
    In a strange ship's wild fraughtage of dark flowers
            Culled for pale poets' graves;
      And opiate odours load the empurpled air
    That flows and droops, a dark resplendent pall
    Under the floating wreaths funereal.

    Under the heavy midnight of thine hair
      An altar flames with spices of the south
    Burning my flesh and spirit in the flame;
    Till, looking tow'rds the land from whence I came
            I find no comfort there,
      And all the darkness to my thirsty mouth
    Is fire, but always and in every place
    Blossoms the secret wonder of thy face.

       *   *   *   *

    The walls, the very walls are woven of dreams,
      All undefined by blasphemies of art!
    Here, pure from finite hues the very night
    Conceives the mystic harmonies of light,
            Delicious glooms and gleams;
      And sorrow falls in rose-leaves on the heart,
    And pain that yearns upon the passing hour
    Is but a perfume haunting a dead flower.

    Hark, as a hammer on a coffin falls
      A knock upon the door! The colours wane,
    The dreams vanish! And leave that foul white scar,
    Tattoo'd with dreadful marks, the old calendar
            Blotching the blistered walls!
      The winter whistles thro' a shivered pane,
    And scatters on the bare boards at my feet
    These poor soiled manuscripts, torn, incomplete...

    The scent of opium floats about my breath;
      But Time resumes his dark and hideous reign;
    And, with him, hideous memories troop, I know.
    Hark, how the battered clock ticks, to and fro,--
        _Life, Death--Life, Death--Life, Death_--
      O fool to cry! O slave to bow to pain,
    Coward to live thus tortured with desire
    By demon nerves in hells of sensual fire.




THE MYSTIC


    With wounds out-reddening every moon-washed rose
    King Love went thro' earth's garden-close!
      From that first gate of birth in the golden gloom,
    I traced Him. Thorns had frayed His garment's hem,
    Ay, and His flesh! I marked, I followed them
      Down to that threshold of--the tomb?

    And there Love vanished, yet I entered! Night
    And Doubt mocked at the dwindling light:
      Strange claw-like hands flung me their shadowy hate.
    I clomb the dreadful stairways of desire
    Between a thousand eyes and wings of fire
      And knocked upon the second Gate.

    The second Gate! When, like a warrior helmed,
    In battle on battle overwhelmed,
      My soul lay stabbed by all the swords of sense,
    Blinded and stunned by stars and flowers and trees,
    Did I not struggle to my bended knees
      And wrestle with Omnipotence?

    Did earth not flee before me, when the breath
    Of worship smote her with strange death,
      Withered her gilded garment, broke her sword,
    Shattered her graven images and smote
    All her light sorrows thro' the breast and throat
      Whose death-cry crowned me God and Lord?

    Yea, God and Lord! Had tears not purged my sight?
    I saw the myriad gates of Light
      Opening and shutting in each way-side flower,
    And like a warder in the gleam of each,
    Death, whispering in some strange eternal speech
      To every passing hour.

    The second Gate? Was I not born to pass
    A million? Though the skies be brass
      And the earth iron, shall I not win thro' all?
    Shall I who made the infinite heavens my mark
    Shrink from this first wild horror of the dark,
      These formless gulfs, these glooms that crawl?

    Never was mine that easy faithless hope
    Which makes all life one flowery slope
      To heaven! Mine be the vast assaults of doom,
    Trumpets, defeats, red anguish, age-long strife,
    Ten million deaths, ten million gates to life,
      The insurgent heart that bursts the tomb.

    Vain, vain, unutterably vain are all
    The sights and sounds that sink and fall,
      The words and symbols of this fleeting breath:
    Shall I not drown the finite in the Whole,
    Cast off this body and complete my soul
      Thro' deaths beyond this gate of death?

    It will not open! Through the bars I see
    The glory and the mystery
      Wind upward ever! The earth-dawn breaks! I bleed
    With beating here for entrance. Hark, O hark,
    Love, Love, return and give me the great Dark,
      Which is the Light of Life indeed.




THE FLOWER OF OLD JAPAN

_DEDICATED TO CAROL, A LITTLE MAIDEN Of MYAKO._


PERSONS OF THE TALE

    OURSELVES
    THE TALL THIN MAN
    THE DWARF BEHIND THE TWISTED PEAR-TREE
    CREEPING SIN
    THE MAD MOONSHEE
    THE NAMELESS ONE

Pirates, Mandarins, Bonzes, Priests, Jugglers, Merchants, Ghastroi,
Weirdrians, etc.


PRELUDE

    You that have known the wonder zone
      Of islands far away;
    You that have heard the dinky bird
    And roamed in rich Cathay;
    You that have sailed o'er unknown seas
    To woods of Amfalula trees
    Where craggy dragons play:
    Oh, girl or woman, boy or man,
    You've plucked the Flower of Old Japan!

    Do you remember the blue stream;
    The bridge of pale bamboo;
    The path that seemed a twisted dream
    Where everything came true;
    The purple cherry-trees; the house
    With jutting eaves below the boughs;
    The mandarins in blue,
    With tiny, tapping, tilted toes,
    And curious curved mustachios?

    _The road to Old Japan!_ you cry,
      _And is it far or near?_
    Some never find it till they die;
      Some find it everywhere;
    The road where restful Time forgets
    His weary thoughts and wild regrets
      And calls the golden year
    Back in a fairy dream to smile
    On young and old a little while.

    Some seek it with a blazing sword,
      And some with old blue plates;
    Some with a miser's golden hoard;
      Some with a book of dates;
    Some with a box of paints; a few
    Whose loads of truth would ne'er pass through
      The first, white, fairy gates;
    And, oh, how shocked they are to find
    That truths are false when left behind!

    Do you remember all the tales
      That Tusitala told,
    When first we plunged thro' purple vales
      In quest of buried gold?
    Do you remember how he said
    That if we fell and hurt our head
      Our hearts must still be bold,
    And we must never mind the pain
    But rise up and go on again?

    Do you remember? Yes; I know
      You must remember still:
    He left us, not so long ago,
      Carolling with a will,
    Because he knew that he should lie
    Under the comfortable sky
      Upon a lonely hill,
    In Old Japan, when day was done;
    "Dear Robert Louis Stevenson."

    And there he knew that he should find
      The hills that haunt us now;
    The whaups that cried upon the wind
      His heart remembered how;
    And friends he loved and left, to roam
    Far from the pleasant hearth of home,
      Should touch his dreaming brow;
    Where fishes fly and birds have fins,
    And children teach the mandarins.

    Ah, let us follow, follow far
      Beyond the purple seas;
    Beyond the rosy foaming bar,
      The coral reef, the trees,
    The land of parrots, and the wild
    That rolls before the fearless child
      Its ancient mysteries:
    Onward and onward, if we can,
    To Old Japan--to Old Japan.


PART I

EMBARKATION

    When the firelight, red and clear,
      Flutters in the black wet pane,
    It is very good to hear
      Howling winds and trotting rain:
    It is very good indeed,
      When the nights are dark and cold,
    Near the friendly hearth to read
      Tales of ghosts and buried gold.

    So with cozy toes and hands
      We were dreaming, just like you;
    Till we thought of palmy lands
      Coloured like a cockatoo;
    All in drowsy nursery nooks
      Near the clutching fire we sat,
    Searching quaint old story-books
      Piled upon the furry mat.

    Something haunted us that night
      Like a half-remembered name;
    Worn old pages in that light
      Seemed the same, yet not the same:
    Curling in the pleasant heat
      Smoothly as a shell-shaped fan,
    O, they breathed and smelt so sweet
      When we turned to Old Japan!

    Suddenly we thought we heard
      Someone tapping on the wall,
    Tapping, tapping like a bird.
      Then a panel seemed to fall
    Quietly; and a tall thin man
      Stepped into the glimmering room,
    And he held a little fan,
      And he waved it in the gloom.

    Curious red, and golds, and greens
      Danced before our startled eyes,
    Birds from painted Indian screens,
      Beads, and shells, and dragon-flies;
    Wings, and flowers, and scent, and flame,
      Fans and fish and heliotrope;
    Till the magic air became
      Like a dream kaleidoscope.

    Then he told us of a land
      Far across a fairy sea;
    And he waved his thin white hand
      Like a flower, melodiously;
    While a red and blue macaw
      Perched upon his pointed head,
    And as in a dream, we saw
      All the curious things he said.

    Tucked in tiny palanquins,
      Magically swinging there,
    Flowery-kirtled mandarins
      Floated through the scented air;
    Wandering dogs and prowling cats
      Grinned at fish in painted lakes;
    Cross-legged conjurers on mats
      Fluted low to listening snakes.

    Fat black bonzes on the shore
      Watched where singing, faint and far,
    Boys in long blue garments bore
      Roses in a golden jar.
    While at carven dragon ships
      Floating o'er that silent sea,
    Squat-limbed gods with dreadful lips
      Leered and smiled mysteriously.

    Like an idol, shrined alone,
      Watched by secret oval eyes,
    Where the ruby wishing-stone
      Smouldering in the darkness lies,
    Anyone that wanted things
      Touched the jewel and they came;
    We were wealthier than kings
      Could we only do the same.

    Yes; we knew a hundred ways
      We might use it if we could;
    To be happy all our days
      As an Indian in a wood;
    No more daily lesson task,
      No more sorrow, no more care;
    So we thought that we would ask
      If he'd kindly lead us there.

    Ah, but then he waved his fan,
      Laughed and vanished through the wall;
    Yet as in a dream, we ran
      Tumbling after, one and all;
    Never pausing once to think,
      Panting after him we sped;
    Far away his robe of pink
      Floated backward as he fled.

    Down a secret passage deep,
      Under roofs of spidery stairs,
    Where the bat-winged nightmares creep,
      And a sheeted phantom glares
    Rushed we; ah, how strange it was
      Where no human watcher stood;
    Till we reached a gate of glass
      Opening on a flowery wood.

    Where the rose-pink robe had flown,
      Borne by swifter feet than ours,
    On to Wonder-Wander town,
      Through the wood of monstrous flowers;
    Mailed in monstrous gold and blue
      Dragon-flies like peacocks fled;
    Butterflies like carpets, too,
      Softly fluttered overhead.

    Down the valley, tip-a-toe,
      Where the broad-limbed giants lie
    Snoring, as when long ago
      Jack on a bean-stalk scaled the sky;
    On to Wonder-Wander town
      Stole we past old dreams again,
    Castles long since battered down,
      Dungeons of forgotten pain.

    Noonday brooded on the wood,
      Evening caught us ere we crept
    Where a twisted pear-tree stood,
      And a dwarf behind it slept;
    Round his scraggy throat he wore,
      Knotted tight, a scarlet scarf;
    Timidly we watched him snore,
      For he seemed a surly dwarf.

    Yet, he looked so very small,
      He could hardly hurt us much;
    We were nearly twice as tall,
      So we woke him with a touch
    Gently, and in tones polite,
      Asked him to direct our path;
    O, his wrinkled eyes grew bright
      Green with ugly gnomish wrath.

        He seemed to choke,
        And gruffly spoke,
    "You're lost: deny it, if you can!
        You want to know
        The way to go?
    There's no such place as Old Japan.

        "You want to seek--
        No, no, don't speak!
    You mean you want to steal a fan.
        You want to see
        The fields of tea?
    They don't grow tea in Old Japan.

        "In China, well
        Perhaps you'd smell
    The cherry bloom: that's if you ran
        A million miles
        And jumped the stiles,
    And never dreamed of Old Japan.

        "What, palanquins,
        And mandarins?
    And, what d'you say, a blue divan?
        And what? Hee! hee!
        You'll never see
    A pig-tailed head in Old Japan.

        "You'd take away
        The ruby, hey?
    I never heard of such a plan!
        Upon my word
        It's quite absurd
    There's not a gem in Old Japan!

        "Oh, dear me, no!
        You'd better go
    Straight home again, my little man:
        Ah, well, you'll see
        But don't blame me;
    I don't believe in Old Japan."

    Then, before we could obey,
      O'er our startled heads he cast,
    Spider-like, a webby grey
      Net that held us prisoned fast;
    How we screamed, he only grinned,
      It was such a lonely place;
    And he said we should be pinned
      Safely in his beetle-case.

    Out he dragged a monstrous box
      From a cave behind the tree!
    It had four-and-twenty locks,
      But he could not find the key,
    And his face grew very pale
      When a sudden voice began
    Drawing nearer through the vale,
      Singing songs of Old Japan,


SONG

    _Satin sails in a crimson dawn
      Over the silky silver sea;
    Purple veils of the dark withdrawn;
      Heavens of pearl and porphyry;
    Purple and white in the morning light
      Over the water the town we knew,
    In tiny state, like a willow-plate,
      Shone, and behind it the hills were blue._

    _There, we remembered, the shadows pass
      All day long like dreams in the night;
    There, in the meadows of dim blue grass,
      Crimson daisies are ringed with white.
    There the roses flutter their petals,
      Over the meadows they take their flight,
    There the moth that sleepily settles
      Turns to a flower in the warm soft light._

    _There when the sunset colours the streets
      Everyone buys at wonderful stalls
    Toys and chocolates, guns and sweets,
      Ivory pistols, and Persian shawls:
    Everyone's pockets are crammed with gold;
      Nobody's heart is worn with care,
    Nobody ever grows tired and old,
      And nobody calls you "Baby" there._

    _There with a hat like a round white dish
      Upside down on each pig-tailed head,
    Jugglers offer you snakes and fish,
      Dreams and dragons and gingerbread;
    Beautiful books with marvellous pictures,
      Painted pirates and streaming gore,
    And everyone reads, without any strictures,
      Tales he remembers for evermore._

    _There when the dim blue daylight lingers
      Listening, and the West grows holy,
    Singers crouch with their long white fingers
      Floating over the zithern slowly:
    Paper lamps with a peachy bloom
      Burn above on the dim blue bough,
    While the zitherns gild the gloom
      With curious music! I hear it now!_

    _Now_: and at that mighty word
      Holding out his magic fan,
    Through the waving flowers appeared,
      Suddenly, the tall thin man:
    And we saw the crumpled dwarf
      Trying to hide behind the tree,
    But his knotted scarlet scarf
      Made him very plain to see.

    Like a soft and smoky cloud
      Passed the webby net away;
    While its owner squealing loud
      Down behind the pear-tree lay;
    For the tall thin man came near,
      And his words were dark and gruff,
    And he swung the dwarf in the air
      By his long and scraggy scruff.

    There he kickled whimpering.
      But our rescuer touched the box,
    Open with a sudden spring
      Clashed the four-and-twenty locks;
    Then he crammed the dwarf inside,
      And the locks all clattered tight:
    Four-and-twenty times he tried
      Whether they were fastened right.

    Ah, he led us on our road,
      Showed us Wonder-Wander town;
    Then he fled: behind him flowed
      Once again the rose-pink gown:
    Down the long deserted street,
      All the windows winked like eyes,
    And our little trotting feet
      Echoed to the starry skies.

    Low and long for evermore
      Where the Wonder-Wander sea
    Whispers to the wistful shore
      Purple songs of mystery,
    Down the shadowy quay we came--
      Though it hides behind the hill
    You will find it just the same
      And the seamen singing still.

    There we chose a ship of pearl,
      And her milky silken sail
    Seemed by magic to unfurl,
      Puffed before a fairy gale;
    Shimmering o'er the purple deep,
      Out across the silvery bar,
    Softly as the wings of sleep
      Sailed we towards the morning star.

    Over us the skies were dark,
      Yet we never needed light;
    Softly shone our tiny bark
      Gliding through the solemn night;
    Softly bright our moony gleam,
      Glimmered o'er the glistening waves,
    Like a cold sea-maiden's dream
      Globed in twilit ocean caves.

    So all night our shallop passed
      Many a haunt of old desire,
    Blurs of savage blossom massed
      Red above a pirate-fire;
    Huts that gloomed and glanced among
      Fruitage dipping in the blue;
    Songs the sirens never sung,
      Shores Ulysses never knew.

    All our fairy rigging shone
      Richly as a rainbow seen
    Where the moonlight floats upon
      Gossamers of gold and green:
    All the tiny spars were bright;
      Beaten gold the bowsprit was;
    But our pilot was the night,
      And our chart a looking-glass.


PART II

THE ARRIVAL

    With rosy finger-tips the Dawn
      Drew back the silver veils,
    Till lilac shimmered into lawn
      Above the satin sails;
    And o'er the waters, white and wan,
      In tiny patterned state,
    We saw the streets of Old Japan
      Shine, like a willow plate.

    O, many a milk-white pigeon roams
      The purple cherry crops,
    The mottled miles of pearly domes,
      And blue pagoda tops,
    The river with its golden canes
      And dark piratic dhows,
    To where beyond the twisting vanes
      The burning mountain glows.

    A snow-peak in the silver skies
      Beyond that magic world,
    We saw the great volcano rise
      With incense o'er it curled,
    Whose tiny thread of rose and blue
      Has risen since time began,
    Before the first enchanter knew
      The peak of Old Japan.

    Nobody watched us quietly steer
    The pinnace to the painted pier,
      Except one pig-tailed mandarin,
    Who sat upon a chest of tea
    Pretending not to hear or see!...
      His hands were very long and thin,
    His face was very broad and white;
    And O, it was a fearful sight
      To see him sit alone and grin!

    His grin was very sleek and sly:
    Timidly we passed him by.
      He did not seem at all to care:
    So, thinking we were safely past,
    We ventured to look back at last.
      O, dreadful blank!--_He was not there!_
    He must have hid behind his chest:
    We did not stay to see the rest.

    But, as in reckless haste we ran,
    We came upon the tall thin man,
    Who called to us and waved his fan,
      And offered us his palanquin:
    He said we must not go alone
    To seek the ruby wishing-stone,
      Because the white-faced mandarin
    Would dog our steps for many a mile,
    And sit upon each purple stile
    Before we came to it, and smile
      And smile; his name was Creeping Sin.

    He played with children's beating hearts,
    And stuck them full of poisoned darts
      And long green thorns that stabbed and stung:
    He'd watch until we tried to speak,
    Then thrust inside his pasty cheek
      His long, white, slimy tongue:
    And smile at everything we said;
    And sometimes pat us on the head,
      And say that we were very young:
    He was a cousin of the man
    Who said that there was no Japan.

    And night and day this Creeping Sin
    Would follow the path of the palanquin;
      Yet if we still were fain to touch
    The ruby, we must have no fear,
    Whatever we might see or hear,
    And the tall thin man would take us there;
      He did not fear that Sly One much,
    Except perhaps on a moonless night,
    Nor even then if the stars were bright.

    So, in the yellow palankeen
    We swung along in state between
    Twinkling domes of gold and green
      Through the rich bazaar,
    Where the cross-legged merchants sat,
    Old and almond-eyed and fat,
    Each upon a gorgeous mat,
      Each in a cymar;
    Each in crimson samite breeches,
    Watching his barbaric riches.

    Cherry blossom breathing sweet
    Whispered o'er the dim blue street
    Where with fierce uncertain feet
      Tawny pirates walk:
    All in belts and baggy blouses,
    Out of dreadful opium houses,
    Out of dens where Death carouses,
      Horribly they stalk;
    Girt with ataghan and dagger,
    Right across the road they swagger.

    And where the cherry orchards blow,
    We saw the maids of Miyako,
    Swaying softly to and fro
      Through the dimness of the dance:
    Like sweet thoughts that shine through dreams
    They glided, wreathing rosy gleams,
    With stately sounds of silken streams,
      And many a slim kohl-lidded glance;
    Then fluttered with tiny rose-bud feet
    To a soft _frou-frou_ and a rhythmic beat
    As the music shimmered, pursuit, retreat,
      "Hands across, retire, advance!"
    And again it changed and the glimmering throng
    Faded into a distant song.


SONG

        _The maidens of Miyako
          Dance in the sunset hours,
        Deep in the sunset glow,
          Under the cherry flowers._

        _With dreamy hands of pearl
          Floating like butterflies,
        Dimly the dancers whirl
          As the rose-light dies;_

        _And their floating gowns, their hair
          Upbound with curious pins,
        Fade thro' the darkening air
          With the dancing mandarins._

    And then, as we went, the tall thin man
    Explained the manners of Old Japan;
      If you pitied a thing, you pretended to sneer;
    Yet if you were glad you ran to buy
    A captive pigeon and let it fly;
      And, if you were sad, you took a spear
    To wound yourself, for fear your pain
    Should quietly grow less again.

    And, again he said, if we wished to find
    The mystic City that enshrined
      The stone so few on earth had found,
    We must be very brave; it lay
    A hundred haunted leagues away,
      Past many a griffon-guarded ground,
    In depths of dark and curious art,
    Where passion-flowers enfold apart
    The Temple of the Flaming Heart,
      The City of the Secret Wound.

    About the fragrant fall of day
    We saw beside the twisted way
      A blue-domed tea-house, bossed with gold;
    Hungry and thirsty we entered in,
    How should we know what Creeping Sin
      Had breathed in that Emperor's ear who sold
    His own dumb soul for an evil jewel
    To the earth-gods, blind and ugly and cruel?
      We drank sweet tea as his tale was told,
    In a garden of blue chrysanthemums,
    While a drowsy swarming of gongs and drums
      Out of the sunset dreamily rolled.

    But, as the murmur nearer drew,
    A fat black bonze, in a robe of blue,
      Suddenly at the gate appeared;
    And close behind, with that evil grin,
    _Was it Creeping Sin, was it Creeping Sin?_
      The bonze looked quietly down and sneered.
    Our guide! Was he sleeping? We could not wake him.
    However we tried to pinch and shake him!

    Nearer, nearer the tumult came,
    Till, as a glare of sound and flame,
      Blind from a terrible furnace door
    Blares, or the mouth of a dragon, blazed
    The seething gateway: deaf and dazed
      With the clanging and the wild uproar
    We stood; while a thousand oval eyes
    Gapped our fear with a sick surmise.

    Then, as the dead sea parted asunder,
    The clamour clove with a sound of thunder
      In two great billows; and all was quiet.
    Gaunt and black was the palankeen
    That came in dreadful state between
      The frozen waves of the wild-eyed riot
    Curling back from the breathless track
    Of the Nameless One who is never seen:
      The close drawn curtains were thick and black;
    But wizen and white was the tall thin man
      As he rose in his sleep:
    His eyes were closed, his lips were wan,
      He crouched like a leopard that dares not leap.

    The bearers halted: the tall thin man,
    Fearfully dreaming, waved his fan,
      With wizard fingers, to and fro;
    While, with a whimper of evil glee,
    The Nameless Emperor's mad Moonshee
      Stepped in front of us: dark and slow
    Were the words of the doom that he dared not name;
    But, over the ground, as he spoke there came
    Tiny circles of soft blue flame;
      Like ghosts of flowers they began to glow,
    And flow like a moonlit brook between
    Our feet and the terrible palankeen.

    But the Moonshee wrinkled his long thin eyes,
    And sneered, "Have you stolen the strength of the skies?
      Then pour before us a stream of pearl!
    Give us the pearl and the gold we know,
    And our hearts will be softened and let you go;
      But these are toys for a foolish girl--
    These vanishing blossoms--what are they worth?
    They are not so heavy as dust and earth:
      Pour before us a stream of pearl!"

    Then, with a wild strange laugh, our guide
    Stretched his arms to the West and cried
      Once, and a song came over the sea;
    And all the blossoms of moon-soft fire
    Woke and breathed as a wind-swept lyre,
      And the garden surged into harmony;
    Till it seemed that the soul of the whole world sung,
    And every petal became a tongue
      To tell the thoughts of Eternity.

    But the Moonshee lifted his painted brows
    And stared at the gold on the blue tea-house:
      "Can you clothe your body with dreams?" he sneered;
    "If you taught us the truths that we always know
    Our heart might be softened and let you go:
      Can you tell us the length of a monkey's beard,
    Or the weight of the gems on the Emperor's fan,
    Or the number of parrots in Old Japan?"

    And again, with a wild strange laugh, our guide
    Looked at him; and he shrunk aside,
      Shrivelling like a flame-touched leaf;
    For the red-cross blossoms of soft blue fire
    Were growing and fluttering higher and higher,
      Shaking their petals out, sheaf by sheaf,
    Till with disks like shields and stems like towers
    Burned the host of the passion-flowers
        ... Had the Moonshee flown like a midnight thief?
      ... Yet a thing like a monkey, shrivelled and black,
    Chattered and danced as they forced him back.

    As the coward chatters for empty pride,
      In the face of a foe that he cannot but fear,
    It chattered and leapt from side to side,
      And its voice rang strangely upon the ear.
    As the cry of a wizard that dares not own
    Another's brighter and mightier throne;
    As the wrath of a fool that rails aloud
      On the fire that burnt him; the brazen bray
    Clamoured and sang o'er the gaping crowd,
      And flapped like a gabbling goose away.


THE CRY OF THE MAD MOONSHEE

        _If the blossoms were beans,
        I should know what it means--
    This blaze, which I certainly cannot endure;
        It is evil, too,
        For its colour is blue,
    And the sense of the matter is quite obscure.
        Celestial truth
        _Is the food of youth;
    But the music was dark as a moonless night.
        The facts in the song
        Were all of them wrong,_

    _And there was not a single sum done right;
    Tho' a metaphysician amongst the crowd,
    In a voice that was notably deep and loud,
    Repeated, as fast as he was able,
    The whole of the multiplication table._

    So the cry flapped off as a wild goose flies,
    And the stars came out in the trembling skies,
      And ever the mystic glory grew
    In the garden of blue chrysanthemums,
    Till there came a rumble of distant drums;
      And the multitude suddenly turned and flew.
    ... A dead ape lay where their feet had been ...
    And we called for the yellow palankeen,
      And the flowers divided and let us through.

    The black-barred moon was large and low
    When we came to the Forest of Ancient Woe;
      And over our heads the stars were bright.
    But through the forest the path we travelled
    Its phosphorescent aisle unravelled
      In one thin ribbon of dwindling light:
    And twice and thrice on the fainting track
    We paused to listen. The moon grew black,
      But the coolies' faces glimmered white,
    As the wild woods echoed in dreadful chorus
    A laugh that came horribly hopping o'er us
      Like monstrous frogs thro' the murky night.

    Then the tall thin man as we swung along
    Sang us an old enchanted song
      That lightened our hearts of their fearful load.
    But, e'en as the moonlit air grew sweet,
    We heard the pad of stealthy feet
      Dogging us down the thin white road;
    And the song grew weary again and harsh,
    And the black trees dripped like the fringe of a marsh,
      And a laugh crept out like a shadowy toad;
    And we knew it was neither ghoul nor djinn:
    _It was Creeping Sin! It was Creeping Sin!_

    But we came to a bend, and the white moon glowed
    Like a gate at the end of the narrowing road
      Far away; and on either hand,
    As guards of a path to the heart's desire,
    The strange tall blossoms of soft blue fire
      Stretched away thro' that unknown land,
    League on league with their dwindling lane
    Down to the large low moon; and again
    There shimmered around us that mystical strain,
      In a tongue that it seemed we could understand.


SONG

    _Hold by right and rule by fear
    Till the slowly broadening sphere
    Melting through the skies above
    Merge into the sphere of love._

    _Hold by might until you find
    Might is powerless o'er the mind:
    Hold by Truth until you see,
    Though they bow before the wind,
    Its towers can mock at liberty._

    _Time, the seneschal, is blind;
    Time is blind: and what are we?
    Captives of Infinity,
    Claiming through Truth's prison bars
    Kinship with the wandering stars._

    O, who could tell the wild weird sights
    We saw in all the days and nights
      We travelled through those forests old.
    We saw the griffons on white cliffs,
    Among fantastic hieroglyphs,
      Guarding enormous heaps of gold:

    We saw the Ghastroi--curious men
    Who dwell, like tigers, in a den,
      And howl whene'er the moon is cold;
    They stripe themselves with red and black
    And ride upon the yellow Yak.

    Their dens are always ankle-deep
    With twisted knives, and in their sleep
      They often cut themselves; they say
    That if you wish to live in peace
    The surest way is not to cease
      Collecting knives; and never a day
    Can pass, unless they buy a few;
    And as their enemies buy them too
      They all avert the impending fray,
    And starve their children and their wives
    To buy the necessary knives.

       *   *   *   *

    The forest leapt with shadowy shapes
    As we came to the great black Tower of Apes:
    But we gave them purple figs and grapes
      In alabaster amphoras:
    We gave them curious kinds of fruit
    With betel nuts and orris-root,
      And then they let us pass:
    And when we reached the Tower of Snakes
    We gave them soft white honey-cakes,
      And warm sweet milk in bowls of brass:
    And on the hundredth eve we found
    The City of the Secret Wound.

    We saw the mystic blossoms blow
    Round the City, far below;
    Faintly in the sunset glow
    We saw the soft blue glory flow
      O'er many a golden garden gate:
    And o'er the tiny dark green seas
    Of tamarisks and tulip-trees,
    Domes like golden oranges
      Dream aloft elate.

    And clearer, clearer as we went,
    We heard from tower and battlement
    A whisper, like a warning, sent
      From watchers out of sight;
    And clearer, brighter, as we drew
    Close to the walls, we saw the blue
    Flashing of plumes where peacocks flew
      Thro' zones of pearly light.

    On either side, a fat black bonze
    Guarded the gates of red-wrought bronze,
    Blazoned with blue sea-dragons
      And mouths of yawning flame;
    Down the road of dusty red,
    Though their brown feet ached and bled,
    Our coolies went with joyful tread:
    Like living fans the gates outspread
      And opened as we came.


PART III

THE MYSTIC RUBY

    The white moon dawned; the sunset died;
    And stars were trembling when we spied
      The rose-red temple of our dreams:
    Its lamp-lit gardens glimmered cool
    With many an onyx-paven pool,
      Amid soft sounds of flowing streams;
    Where star-shine shimmered through the white
    Tall fountain-shafts of crystal light
      In ever changing rainbow-gleams.

    Priests in flowing yellow robes
    Glided under rosy globes
      Through the green pomegranate boughs
    Moonbeams poured their coloured rain;
    Roofs of sea-green porcelain
      Jutted o'er the rose-red house;
    Bells were hung beneath its eaves;
    Every wind that stirred the leaves
      Tinkled as tired water does.

    The temple had a low broad base
    Of black bright marble; all its face
      Was marble bright in rosy bloom;
    And where two sea-green pillars rose
    Deep in the flower-soft eave-shadows
      We saw, thro' richly sparkling gloom,
    Wrought in marvellous years of old
    With bulls and peacocks bossed in gold,
      The doors of powdered lacquer loom.

    Quietly then the tall thin man,
    Holding his turquoise-tinted fan,
      Alighted from the palanquin;
    We followed: never painter dreamed
    Of how that dark rich temple gleamed
      With gules of jewelled gloom within;
    And as we wondered near the door
    A priest came o'er the polished floor
      In sandals of soft serpent-skin;
    His mitre shimmered bright and blue
    With pigeon's breast-plumes. When he knew
      Our quest he stroked his broad white chin,
    And looked at us with slanting eyes
    And smiled; then through his deep disguise
    _We knew him! It was Creeping Sin!_

    But cunningly he bowed his head
    Down on his gilded breast and said
      _Come_: and he led us through the dusk
    Of passages whose painted walls
    Gleamed with dark old festivals;
      Till where the gloom grew sweet with musk
    And incense, through a door of amber
    We came into a high-arched chamber.

    There on a throne of jasper sat
    A monstrous idol, black and fat;
      Thick rose-oil dropped upon its head:
    Drop by drop, heavy and sweet,
    Trickled down to its ebon feet
      Whereon the blood of goats was shed,
    And smeared around its perfumed knees
    In savage midnight mysteries.

    It wore about its bulging waist
    A belt of dark green bronze enchased
      With big, soft, cloudy pearls; its wrists
    Were clasped about with moony gems
    Gathered from dead kings' diadems;
      Its throat was ringed with amethysts,
    And in its awful hand it held
    A softly smouldering emerald.

    Silkily murmured Creeping Sin,
    "This is the stone you wished to win!"
      "White Snake," replied the tall thin man,
    "Show us the Ruby Stone, or I
    Will slay thee with my hands." The sly
      Long eyelids of the priest began
    To slant aside; and then once more
    He led us through the fragrant door.

    And now along the passage walls
    Were painted hideous animals,
      With hooded eyes and cloven stings:
    In the incense that like shadowy hair
    Streamed over them they seemed to stir
      Their craggy claws and crooked wings.
    At last we saw strange moon-wreaths curl
    Around a deep, soft porch of pearl.

    O, what enchanter wove in dreams
    That chapel wild with shadowy gleams
      And prismy colours of the moon?
    Shrined like a rainbow in a mist
    Of flowers, the fretted amethyst
      Arches rose to a mystic tune;
    And never mortal art inlaid
    Those cloudy floors of sea-soft jade.

    There, in the midst, an idol rose
    White as the silent starlit snows
      On lonely Himalayan heights:
    Over its head the spikenard spilled
    Down to its feet, with myrrh distilled
      In distant, odorous Indian nights:
    It held before its ivory face
    A flaming yellow chrysoprase.

    O, silkily murmured Creeping Sin,
    "This is the stone you wished to win."
      But in his ear the tall thin man
    _Whispered with slow, strange lips_--we knew
    Not what, but Creeping Sin went blue
      With fear; again his eyes began
    To slant aside; then through the porch
    He passed, and lit a tall, brown torch.

    Down a corridor dark as death,
    With beating hearts and bated breath
      We hurried; far away we heard
    A dreadful hissing, fierce as fire
    When rain begins to quench a pyre;
      And where the smoky torch-light flared
    Strange vermin beat their bat-like wings,
    And the wet walls dropped with slimy things.

    And darker, darker, wound the way,
    Beyond all gleams of night and day,
      And still that hideous hissing grew
    Louder and louder on our ears,
    And tortured us with eyeless fears;
      Then suddenly the gloom turned blue,
    And, in the wall, a rough rock cave
    Gaped, like a phosphorescent grave.

    And from the purple mist within
    There came a wild tumultuous din
      Of snakes that reared their heads and hissed
    As if a witch's cauldron boiled;
    All round the door great serpents coiled,
      With eyes of glowing amethyst,
    Whose fierce blue flames began to slide
    Like shooting stars from side to side.

    Ah! with a sickly gasping grin
    And quivering eyelids, Creeping Sin
      Stole to the cave; but, suddenly,
    As through its glimmering mouth he passed,
    The serpents flashed and gripped him fast:
      He wriggled and gave one awful cry,
    Then all at once the cave was cleared;
    The snakes with their victim had disappeared.

    And fearlessly the tall thin man
    Opened his turquoise-tinted fan
      And entered; and the mists grew bright,
    And we saw that the cave was a diamond hall
    Lit with lamps for a festival.
      A myriad globes of coloured light
    Went gliding deep in its massy sides,
    Like the shimmering moons in the glassy tides
      Where a sea-king's palace enchants the night.

    Gliding and flowing, a glory and wonder,
    Through each other, and over, and under,
      The lucent orbs of green and gold,
    Bright with sorrow or soft with sleep,
    In music through the glimmering deep,
      Over their secret axles rolled,
    And circled by the murmuring spheres
    We saw in a frame of frozen tears
      A mirror that made the blood run cold.

    For, when we came to it, we found
    It imaged everything around
      Except the face that gazed in it;
    And where the mirrored face should be
    A heart-shaped Ruby fierily
      Smouldered; and round the frame was writ,
    _Mystery: Time and Tide shall pass,
    I am the Wisdom Looking-Glass._

    _This is the Ruby none can touch:
    Many have loved it overmuch;
      Its fathomless fires flutter and sigh,
    Being as images of the flame
    That shall make earth and heaven the same
      When the fire of the end reddens the sky,
    And the world consumes like a burning pall,
    Till where there is nothing, there is all._

    So we looked up at the tall thin man
    And we saw that his face grew sad and wan:
      Tears were glistening in his eyes:
    At last, with a breaking sob, he bent
    His head upon his breast and went
      Swiftly away! With dreadful cries
    We rushed to the softly glimmering door
    And stared at the hideous corridor.
      But his robe was gone as a dream that flies:
    Back to the glass in terror we came,
    And stared at the writing round the frame.

    We could not understand one word:
    And suddenly we thought we heard
      The hissing of the snakes again:
    How could we front them all alone?
    O, madly we clutched at the mirrored stone
      And wished we were back on the flowery plain:
    And swifter than thought and swift as fear
    The whole world flashed, and behold we were there.

    Yes; there was the port of Old Japan,
    With its twisted patterns, white and wan,
    Shining like a mottled fan
      Spread by the blue sea, faint and far;
    And far away we heard once more
    A sound of singing on the shore,
    Where boys in blue kimonos bore
      Roses in a golden jar:
    And we heard, where the cherry orchards blow,
    The serpent-charmers fluting low,
    And the song of the maidens of Miyako.

    And at our feet unbroken lay
    The glass that had whirled us thither away:
      And in the grass, among the flowers
    We sat and wished all sorts of things:
    O, we were wealthier than kings!
      We ruled the world for several hours!
    And then, it seemed, we knew not why,
    All the daisies began to die.

    We wished them alive again; but soon
    The trees all fled up towards the moon
      Like peacocks through the sunlit air:
    And the butterflies flapped into silver fish;
    And each wish spoiled another wish;
      Till we threw the glass down in despair;
    For, getting whatever you want to get,
    Is like drinking tea from a fishing net.

    At last we thought we'd wish once more
    That all should be as it was before;
      And then we'd shatter the glass, if we could;
    But just as the world grew right again,
    We heard a wanderer out on the plain
      Singing what none of us understood;
    Yet we thought that the world grew thrice more sweet
    And the meadows were blossoming under his feet.

    And we felt a grand and beautiful fear,
    For we knew that a marvellous thought drew near;
      So we kept the glass for a little while:
    And the skies grew deeper and twice as bright,
    And the seas grew soft as a flower of light,
      And the meadows rippled from stile to stile;
    And memories danced in a musical throng
    Thro' the blossom that scented the wonderful song.


SONG

    _We sailed across the silver seas
      And saw the sea-blue bowers,
    We saw the purple cherry trees,
      And all the foreign flowers,
    We travelled in a palanquin
      Beyond the caravan,
    And yet our hearts had never seen
      The Flower of Old Japan._

    _The Flower above all other flowers,
      The Flower that never dies;
    Before whose throne the scented hours
      Offer their sacrifice;
    The Flower that here on earth below
      Reveals the heavenly plan;
    But only little children know
      The Flower of Old Japan._

    There, in the dim blue flowery plain
    We wished with the magic glass again
      To go to the Flower of the song's desire:
    And o'er us the whole of the soft blue sky
    Flashed like fire as the world went by,
      And far beneath us the sea like fire
    Flashed in one swift blue brilliant stream,
    And the journey was done, like a change in a dream.


PART IV

THE END OF THE QUEST

    Like the dawn upon a dream
      Slowly through the scented gloom
    Crept once more the ruddy gleam
      O'er the friendly nursery room.
    There, before our waking eyes,
      Large and ghostly, white and dim,
    Dreamed the Flower that never dies,
      Opening wide its rosy rim.

    Spreading like a ghostly fan,
      Petals white as porcelain,
    There the Flower of Old Japan
      Told us we were home again;
    For a soft and curious light
      Suddenly was o'er it shed.
    And we saw it was a white
      English daisy, ringed with red.

    Slowly, as a wavering mist
      Waned the wonder out of sight,
    To a sigh of amethyst,
      To a wraith of scented light.
    Flower and magic glass had gone;
      Near the clutching fire we sat
    Dreaming, dreaming, all alone,
      Each upon a furry mat.

    While the firelight, red and clear,
      Fluttered in the black wet pane,
    It was very good to hear
      Howling winds and trotting rain.
    For we found at last we knew
      More than all our fancy planned,
    All the fairy tales were true,
      And home the heart of fairyland.


EPILOGUE

    Carol, every violet has
    Heaven for a looking-glass!

    Every little valley lies
    Under many-clouded skies;
    Every little cottage stands
    Girt about with boundless lands.
    Every little glimmering pond
    Claims the mighty shores beyond--
    Shores no seamen ever hailed,
    Seas no ship has ever sailed.

    All the shores when day is done
    Fade into the setting sun,
    So the story tries to teach
    More than can be told in speech.

    Beauty is a fading flower,
    Truth is but a wizard's tower,
    Where a solemn death-bell tolls,
    And a forest round it rolls.

    We have come by curious ways
    To the Light that holds the days;
    We have sought in haunts of fear
    For that all-enfolding sphere:
    And lo! it was not far, but near.

    We have found, O foolish-fond,
    The shore that has no shore beyond.

    Deep in every heart it lies
    With its untranscended skies;
    For what heaven should bend above
    Hearts that own the heaven of love?

    Carol, Carol, we have come
    Back to heaven, back to home.




APES AND IVORY


    Apes and ivory, skulls and roses, in junks of old Hong-Kong,
    Gliding over a sea of dreams to a haunted shore of song,
    Masts of gold and sails of satin, shimmering out of the East,
    O, Love has little need of you now to make his heart a feast.

    Or is it an elephant, white as milk and bearing a severed head
    That tatters his broad soft wrinkled flank in tawdry patches of red,
    With a negro giant to walk beside and a temple dome above,
    Where ruby and emerald shatter the sun,--is it these that should
        please my love?

    Or is it a palace of pomegranates, where ivory-limbed young slaves
    Lure a luxury out of the noon in the swooning fountain's waves;
    Or couch like cats and sun themselves on the warm white marble brink?
    O, Love has little to ask of these, this day in May, I think.

    Is it Lebanon cedars or purple fruits of the honeyed southron air,
    Spikenard, saffron, roses of Sharon, cinnamon, calamus, myrrh,
    A bed of spices, a fountain of waters, or the wild white wings of
        a dove,
    Now, when the winter is over and gone, is it these that should
        please my love?

    The leaves outburst on the hazel-bough and the hawthorn's heaped
        wi' flower,
    And God has bidden the crisp clouds build my love a lordlier tower,
    Taller than Lebanon, whiter than snow, in the fresh blue skies above;
    And the wild rose wakes in the winding lanes of the radiant land
        I love.

    _Apes and ivory, skulls and roses, in junks of old Hong-Kong,
    Gliding over a sea of dreams to a haunted shore of song,
    Masts of gold and sails of satin, shimmering out of the East,
    O, Love has little need of you now to make his heart a feast._




A SONG OF SHERWOOD


    Sherwood in the twilight, is Robin Hood awake?
    Grey and ghostly shadows are gliding through the brake,
    Shadows of the dappled deer, dreaming of the morn,
    Dreaming of a shadowy man that winds a shadowy horn.

    Robin Hood is here again: all his merry thieves
    Hear a ghostly bugle-note shivering through the leaves,
    Calling as he used to call, faint and far away,
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Merry, merry England has kissed the lips of June:
    All the wings of fairyland were here beneath the moon,
    Like a flight of rose-leaves fluttering in a mist
    Of opal and ruby and pearl and amethyst.

    Merry, merry England is waking as of old,
    With eyes of blither hazel and hair of brighter gold:
    For Robin Hood is here again beneath the bursting spray
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Love is in the greenwood building him a house
    Of wild rose and hawthorn and honeysuckle boughs:
    Love is in the greenwood, dawn is in the skies,
    And Marian is waiting with a glory in her eyes.

    Hark! The dazzled laverock climbs the golden steep!
    Marian is waiting: is Robin Hood asleep?
    Round the fairy grass-rings frolic elf and fay,
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Oberon, Oberon, rake away the gold,
    Rake away the red leaves, roll away the mould,
    Rake away the gold leaves, roll away the red,
    And wake Will Scarlett from his leafy forest bed.

    Friar Tuck and Little John are riding down together
    With quarter-staff and drinking-can and grey goose-feather.
    The dead are coming back again, the years are rolled away
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Softly over Sherwood the south wind blows.
    All the heart of England hid in every rose
    Hears across the greenwood the sunny whisper leap,
    Sherwood in the red dawn, is Robin Hood asleep?

    Hark, the voice of England wakes him as of old
    And, shattering the silence with a cry of brighter gold
    Bugles in the greenwood echo from the steep,
    _Sherwood in the red dawn, is Robin Hood asleep?_

    Where the deer are gliding down the shadowy glen
    All across the glades of fern he calls his merry men--
    Doublets of the Lincoln green glancing through the May
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day--

    Calls them and they answer: from aisles of oak and ash
    Rings the _Follow! Follow!_ and the boughs begin to crash,
    The ferns begin to flutter and the flowers begin to fly,
    And through the crimson dawning the robber band goes by.

    _Robin! Robin! Robin!_ All his merry thieves
    Answer as the bugle-note shivers through the leaves,
    Calling as he used to call, faint and far away,
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.




THE WORLD'S MAY-QUEEN


    I

    Whither away is the Spring to-day?
            To England, to England!
    In France they heard the South wind say,
    "She's off on a quest for a Queen o' the May,
    So she's over the hills far away,
            To England!"

    And why did she fly with her golden feet
            To England, to England?
    In Italy, too, they heard the sweet
    Roses whisper and flutter and beat--
    "She's an old and a true, true love to greet
            In England!"

    A moon ago there came a cry
            From England, from England,
    Faintly, fondly it faltered nigh
    The throne of the Spring in the Southern sky,
    And it whispered "Come," and the world went by,
    And with one long loving blissful sigh
            The Spring was away to England!


    II

    When Spring comes back to England
      And crowns her brows with May,
    Round the merry moonlit world
      She goes the greenwood way:
    She throws a rose to Italy,
      A fleur-de-lys to France;
    But round her regal morris-ring
      The seas of England dance.

    When Spring comes back to England
      And dons her robe of green,
    There's many a nation garlanded
      But England is the Queen;
    She's Queen, she's Queen of all the world
      Beneath the laughing sky,
    For the nations go a-Maying
      When they hear the New Year cry--

    "Come over the water to England,
      My old love, my new love,
    Come over the water to England,
      In showers of flowery rain;
    Come over the water to England,
      April, my true love;
    And tell the heart of England
      The Spring is here again!"


    III

    So it's here, she is here with her eyes of blue
            In England, In England!
    She has brought us the rainbows with her, too,
    And a glory of shimmering glimmering dew
    And a heaven of quivering scent and hue
    And a lily for me and a rose for you
            In England.

    There's many a wanderer far away
            From England, from England,
    Will toss upon his couch and say--
    Though Spain is proud and France is gay,
    And there's many a foot on the primrose way,
    The world has never a Queen o' the May
            But England.


    IV

    When Drake went out to seek for gold
      Across the uncharted sea,
    And saw the Western skies unfold
      Their veils of mystery;
    To lure him through the fevered hours
      As nigh to death he lay,
    There floated o'er the foreign flowers
      A breath of English May:

    And back to Devon shores again
      His dreaming spirit flew
    Over the splendid Spanish Main
      To haunts his childhood knew,
    Whispering "God forgive the blind
      Desire that bade me roam,
    I've sailed around the world to find
      The sweetest way to home."


    V

    And it's whither away is the Spring to-day?
            To England, to England!
    In France you'll hear the South wind say,
    "She off on a quest for a Queen o' the May,
    So she's over the hills and far away,
            To England!"

    She's flown with the swallows across the sea
            To England, to England!
    For there's many a land of the brave and free
    But never a home o' the hawthorn-tree,
    And never a Queen o' the May for me
            But England!

    And round the fairy revels whirl
            In England, in England!
    And the buds outbreak and the leaves unfurl,
    And where the crisp white cloudlets curl
    The Dawn comes up like a primrose girl
    With a crowd of flowers in a basket of pearl
            For England!




PIRATES


    Come to me, you with the laughing face, in the night as I lie
    Dreaming of days that are dead and of joys gone by;
    Come to me, comrade, come through the slow-dropping rain,
    Come from your grave in the darkness and let us be pirates again.

    Let us be boys together to-night, and pretend as of old
    We are pirates at rest in a cave among huge heaps of gold,
    Red Spanish doubloons and great pieces of eight, and muskets
        and swords,
    And a smoky red camp-fire to glint, you know how, on our
        ill-gotten hoards.

    The old cave in the fir-wood that slopes down the hills to the sea
    Still is haunted, perhaps, by young pirates as wicked as we:
    Though the fir with the magpie's big mud-plastered nest used to hide
        it so well,
    And the boys in the gang had to swear that they never would tell.

    Ah, that tree; I have sat in its boughs and looked seaward for hours.
    I remember the creak of its branches, the scent of the flowers
    That climbed round the mouth of the cave. It is odd I recall
    Those little things best, that I scarcely took heed of at all.

    I remember how brightly the brass on the butt of my spy-glass gleamed
    As I climbed through the purple heather and thyme to our eyrie
        and dreamed;
    I remember the smooth glossy sun-burn that darkened our faces
        and hands
    As we gazed at the merchantmen sailing away to those wonderful lands.

    I remember the long, slow sigh of the sea as we raced in the sun,
    To dry ourselves after our swimming; and how we would run
    With a cry and a crash through the foam as it creamed on the shore,
    Then back to bask in the warm dry gold of the sand once more.

    Come to me, you with the laughing face, in the gloom as I lie
    Dreaming of days that are dead and of joys gone by;
    Let us be boys together to-night and pretend as of old
    We are pirates at rest in a cave among great heaps of gold.

    Come; you shall be chief. We'll not quarrel, the time flies so fast.
    There are ships to be grappled, there's blood to be shed, ere our
        playtime be past.
    No; perhaps we _will_ quarrel, just once, or it scarcely will seem
    So like the old days that have flown from us both like a dream.

    Still; you shall be chief in the end; and then we'll go home
    To the hearth and the tea and the books that we loved: ah, but come,
    Come to me, come through the night and the slow-dropping rain;
    Come, old friend, come thro' the darkness and let us be playmates again.




A SONG OF ENGLAND


    There is a song of England that none shall ever sing;
                  So sweet it is and fleet it is
    That none whose words are not as fleet as birds upon the wing,
                  And regal as her mountains,
                  And radiant as the fountains
    Of rainbow-coloured sea-spray that every wave can fling
    Against the cliffs of England, the sturdy cliffs of England,
                  Could more than seem to dream of it,
                  Or catch one flying gleam of it,
    Above the seas of England that never cease to sing.

    There is a song of England that only lovers know;
                  So rare it is and fair it is,
    O, like a fairy rose it is upon a drift of snow,
                  So cold and sweet and sunny,
                  So full of hidden honey,
    So like a flight of butterflies where rose and lily blow
    Along the lanes of England, the leafy lanes of England;
                  When flowers are at their vespers
                  And full of little whispers,
    The boys and girls of England shall sing it as they go.

    There is a song of England that only love may sing,
                  So sure it is and pure it is;
    And seaward with the sea-mew it spreads a whiter wing,
                  And with the sky-lark hovers
                  Above the tryst of lovers,
    Above the kiss and whisper that led the lovely Spring
    Through all the glades of England, the ferny glades of England,
                  Until the way enwound her
                  With sprays of May, and crowned her
    With stars of frosty blossom in a merry morris-ring.

    There is a song of England that haunts her hours of rest:
                  The calm of it and balm of it
    Are breathed from every hedgerow that blushes to the West
                  From the cottage doors that nightly
                  Cast their welcome out so brightly
    On the lanes where laughing children are lifted and caressed
    By the tenderest hands in England, hard and blistered hands of England:
                  And from the restful sighing
                  Of the sleepers that are lying
    With the arms of God around them on the night's contented breast.

    There is a song of England that wanders on the wind;
                  So sad it is and glad it is
    That men who hear it madden and their eyes are wet and blind,
                  For the lowlands and the highlands
                  Of the unforgotten islands,
    For the Islands of the Blesséd and the rest they cannot find
    As they grope in dreams to England and the love they left in England;
                  Little feet that danced to meet them
                  And the lips that used to greet them,
    And the watcher at the window in the home they left behind.

    There is a song of England that thrills the beating blood
                  With burning cries and yearning
    Tides of hidden aspiration hardly known or understood;
                  Aspirations of the creature
                  Tow'rds the unity of Nature;
    Sudden chivalries revealing whence the longing is renewed
    In the men that live for England, live and love and die for England:
                  By the light of their desire
                  They shall blindly blunder higher,
    To a wider, grander Kingdom and a deeper, nobler Good.

    There is a song of England that only heaven can hear;
                  So gloriously victorious,
    It soars above the choral stars that sing the Golden Year;
                  Till even the cloudy shadows
                  That wander o'er her meadows
    In silent purple harmonies declare His glory there,
    Along the hills of England, the billowy hills of England;
                  While heaven rolls and ranges
                  Through all the myriad changes
    That mirror God in music to the mortal eye and ear.

    _There is a song of England that none shall ever sing;
                  So sweet it is and fleet it is
    That none whose words are not as fleet as birds upon the wing,
                  And regal as her mountains,
                  And radiant as her fountains
    Of rainbow-coloured sea-spray that every wave can fling
    Against the cliffs of England, the sturdy cliffs of England,
                  Could more than seem to dream of it,
                  Or catch one flying gleam of it,
    Above the seas of England that never cease to sing._




THE OLD SCEPTIC


    I am weary of disbelieving: why should I wound my love
      To pleasure a sophist's pride in a graven image of truth?
    I will go back to my home, with the clouds and the stars above,
      And the heaven I used to know, and the God of my buried youth.

    I will go back to the home where of old in my boyish pride
      I pierced my father's heart with a murmur of unbelief.
    He only looked in my face as I spoke, but his mute eyes cried
      Night after night in my dreams; and he died in grief, in grief.

    Books? I have read the books, the books that we write ourselves,
      Extolling our love of an abstract truth and our pride of debate:
    I will go back to the love of the cotter who sings as he delves,
      To that childish infinite love and the God above fact and date.

    To that ignorant infinite God who colours the meaningless flowers,
      To that lawless infinite Poet who crowns the law with the crime;
    To the Weaver who covers the world with a garment of wonderful hours,
      And holds in His hand like threads the tales and the truths of time.

    Is the faith of the cotter so simple and narrow as this? Ah, well,
      It is hardly so narrow as yours who daub and plaster with dyes
    The shining mirrors of heaven, the shadowy mirrors of hell,
      And blot out the dark deep vision, if it seem to be framed with lies.

    No faith I hurl against you, no fact to freeze your sneers.
      Only the doubt you taught me to weld in the fires of youth
    Leaps to my hand like the flaming sword of nineteen hundred years,
      The sword of the high God's answer, _O Pilate, what is truth?_

    Your laughter has killed more hearts than ever were pierced with swords,
      Ever you daub new mirrors and turn the old to the wall;
    And more than blood is lost in the weary battle of words;
      For creeds are many; but God is One, and contains them all.

    Ah, why should we strive or cry? Surely the end is close!
      Hold by your little truths: deem your triumph complete!
    But nothing is true or false in the infinite heart of the rose;
      And the earth is a little dust that clings to our travelling feet.

    I will go back to my home and look at the wayside flowers,
      And hear from the wayside cabins the kind old hymns again,
    Where Christ holds out His arms in the quiet evening hours,
      And the light of the chapel porches broods on the peaceful lane.

    And there I shall hear men praying the deep old foolish prayers,
      And there I shall see, once more, the fond old faith confessed,
    And the strange old light on their faces who hear as a blind man hears,--
     _Come unto Me, ye weary, and I will give you rest._

    I will go back and believe in the deep old foolish tales,
      And pray the simple prayers that I learned at my mother's knee,
    Where the Sabbath tolls its peace thro' the breathless mountain-vales,
      And the sunset's evening hymn hallows the listening sea.




THE DEATH OF CHOPIN


    Sing to me! Ah, remember how
      Poor Heine here in Paris leant
    Watching me play at the fall of day
      And following where the music went,
    Till that old cloud upon his brow
      Was almost smoothed away.

    "Do roses in the moonlight flame
      Like this and this?" he said and smiled;
    Then bent his head as o'er his dead
      Brother might breathe some little child
    The accustomed old half-jesting name,
      With all its mockery fled,

    Like summer lightnings, far away,
      In heaven. O, what Bohemian nights
    We passed down there for that brief year
      When art revealed her last delights;
    And then, that night, that night in May
      When Hugo came to hear!

    "Do roses in the moonlight glow
      Like this and this?" I could not see
    His eyes, and yet--they were quite wet,
      Blinded, I think! What should I be
    If in that hour I did not know
      My own diviner debt?

    For God has made this world of ours
      Out of His own exceeding pain,
    As here in art man's bleeding heart
      Slow drop by drop completes the strain;
    And dreams of death make sweet the flowers
      Where lovers meet to part.

    Recall, recall my little room
      Where all the masters came that night,
    Came just to hear me, Meyerbeer,
      Lamartine, Balzac; and no light
    But my two candles in the gloom;
      Though she, she too was there,

    George Sand. This music once unlocked
      My heart, she took the gold she prized:
    Her novel gleams no richer: dreams
      Like mine are best unanalysed:
    And she forgets her poor bemocked
      Prince Karol, now, it seems.

    I was Prince Karol; yes, and Liszt
      Count Salvator Albani: she
    My Floriani--all so far
      Away!--My dreams are like the sea
    That round Majorca sighed and kissed
      Each softly mirrored star.

    O, what a golden round of hours
      Our island villa knew: we two
    Alone with sky and sea, the sigh
      Of waves, the warm unfathomed blue;
    With what a chain of nights like flowers
      We bound Love, she and I.

    What music, what harmonious
      Glad triumphs of the world's desire
    Where passion yearns to God and burns
      Earth's dross out with its own pure fire,
    Or tolls like some deep angelus
      Through Death's divine nocturnes.

    "Do roses in the moonlight glow
      Like this and this?" What did she think
    Of him whose hands at Love's command
      Made Life as honey o'er the brink
    Of Death drip slow, darkling and slow?
      Ah, did she understand?

    She studied every sob she heard,
      She watched each dying hope she found;
    And yet she understood not one
      Poor sorrow there that like a wound
    Gaped, bleeding, pleading--for one word--
      No? And the dream was done.

    For her--I am "wrapped in incense gloom,
      In drifting clouds and golden light;"
    Once I was shod with fire and trod
      Beethoven's path through storm and night:
    It is too late now to resume
      My monologue with God.

    Well, my lost love, you were so kind
      In those old days: ah, yes; you came
    When I was ill! In dreams you still
      Will come? (Do roses always flame
    By moonlight, thus?) I, too, grow blind
      With wondering if she will.

    Yet, Floriani, what am I
      To you, though love was life to me?
    My life consumed like some perfumed
      Pale altar-flame beside the sea:
    You stood and smiled and watched it die!
      You, you whom it illumed,
    Could you not feed it with your love?
      Am I not starving here and now?
    Sing, sing! I'd miss no smile or kiss--
      No roses in Majorca glow
    Like this and this--so death may prove
      Best--ah, how sweet life is!




SONG

(AFTER THE FRENCH OF ROSTAND)


    O, many a lover sighs
    Beneath the summer skies
    For black or hazel eyes
              All day.
    No light of hope can mar
    My whiter brighter star;
    I love a Princess far
              Away.

    Now you that haste to meet
    Your love's returning feet
    Must plead for every sweet
              Caress;
    But, day and night and day,
    Without a prayer to pray,
    I love my far away
              Princess.




BUTTERFLIES


    Sun-child, as you watched the rain
            Beat the pane,
    Saw the garden of your dreams
      Where the clove carnation grows
            And the rose
    Veiled with shimmering shades and gleams,
    Mirrored colours, mystic gleams,
              Fairy dreams,
    Drifting in your radiant eyes
      Half in earnest asked, that day,
              Half in play,
    Where were all the butterflies?

    Where were all the butterflies
              When the skies
    Clouded and their bowers of clover
      Bowed beneath the golden shower?
              Every flower
    Shook and the rose was brimming over.

    Ah, the dog-rose trembling over
              Thyme and clover,
    How it glitters in the sun,
      Now the hare-bells lift again
              Bright with rain
    After all the showers are done!

    See, when all the showers are done,
              How the sun
    Softly smiling o'er the scene
      Bids the white wings come and go
              To and fro
    Through the maze of gold and green.

    Magic webs of gold and green
              Rainbow sheen
    Mesh the maze of flower and fern,
      Cuckoo-grass and meadow-sweet,
              And the wheat
    Where the crimson poppies burn.

    Ay; and where the poppies burn,
              They return
    All across the dreamy downs,
      Little wings that flutter and beat
              O'er the sweet
    Bluffs the purple clover crowns.

    Where the fairy clover crowns
              Dreamy downs,
    And amidst the golden grass
      Buttercups and daisies blow
              To and fro
    When the shadowy billows pass;

    Time has watched them pause and pass
              Where Love was;
    Ah, what fairy butterflies,
      Little wild incarnate blisses,
              Coloured kisses,
    Floating under azure skies!

    Under those eternal skies
              See, they rise:
    Mottled wings of moony sheen,
      Wings in whitest star-shine dipped,
              Orange tipped,
    Eyed with black and veined with green.

    They were fairies plumed with green
              Rainbow-sheen
    Ere Time bade their host begone
      From that palace built of roses
              Which still dozes
    In the greenwood all alone.

    In the greenwood all alone
              And unknown:
    Now they roam these mortal dells
      Wondering where that happy glade is,
              Painted Ladies,
    Admirals, and Tortoise-shells,

    O, Fritillaries, Admirals,
              Tortoise-shells;
    You, like fragments of the skies
      Fringed with Autumn's richest hues,
              Dainty blues
    Patterned with mosaic dyes;
    Oh, and you whose peacock dyes
              Gleam with eyes;
    You, whose wings of burnished copper
      Burn upon the sunburnt brae
              Where all day
    Whirrs the hot and grey grasshopper;

    While the grey grasshopper whirrs
              In the furze,
    You that with your sulphur wings
      Melt into the gold perfume
              Of the broom
    Where the linnet sits and sings;

    You that, as a poet sings,
              On your wings
    Image forth the dreams of earth,
      Quickening them in form and hue
              To the new
    Glory of a brighter birth;

    You that bring to a brighter birth
              Dust and earth,
    Rapt to glory on your wings,
      All transfigured in the white
              Living light
    Shed from out the soul of things;

    Heralds of the soul of things,
              You whose wings
    Carry heaven through every glade;
      Thus transfigured from the petals
              Death unsettles,
    Little souls of leaf and blade;

    You that mimic bud and blade,
              Light and shade;
    Tinted souls of leaf and stone,
      Flower and sunny bank of sand,
              Fairyland
    Calls her children to their own;
    Calls them back into their own
              Great unknown;
    Where the harmonies they cull
      On their wings are made complete
              As they beat
    Through the Gate called Beautiful.




SONG OF THE WOODEN-LEGGED FIDDLER

(PORTSMOUTH 1805)


    I lived in a cottage adown in the West
            When I was a boy, a boy;
    But I knew no peace and I took no rest
    Though the roses nigh smothered my snug little nest;
            For the smell of the sea
            Was much rarer to me,
    And the life of a sailor was all my joy.

    CHORUS.--_The life of a sailor was all my joy!_

    My mother she wept, and she begged me to stay
      Anchored for life to her apron-string,
    And soon she would want me to help with the hay;
    So I bided her time, then I flitted away
      On a night of delight in the following spring,
            With a pair of stout shoon
            And a seafaring tune
    And a bundle and stick in the light of the moon,
            Down the long road
            To Portsmouth I strode,
    To fight like a sailor for country and king.

    CHORUS.--_To fight like a sailor for country and king._

    And now that my feet are turned homeward again
      My heart is still crying Ahoy! Ahoy!
    And my thoughts are still out on the Spanish main
    A-chasing the frigates of France and Spain,
      For at heart an old sailor is always a boy;
              And his nose will still itch
              For the powder and pitch
    Till the days when he can't tell t'other from which,
      Nor a grin o' the guns from a glint o' the sea,
      Nor a skipper like Nelson from lubbers like me.

    CHORUS.--_Nor a skipper like Nelson from lubbers like me._

    Ay! Now that I'm old I'm as bold as the best,
      And the life of a sailor is all my joy;
              Though I've swapped my leg
              For a wooden peg
    And my head is as bald as a new-laid egg,
              The smell of the sea
              Is like victuals to me,
    And I think in the grave I'll be crying Ahoy!
      For, though my old carcass is ready to rest,
      At heart an old sailor is always a boy.

    CHORUS.--_At heart an old sailor is always a boy._




THE FISHER-GIRL


    Where the old grey churchyard slopes to the sea,
      On the sunny side of a mossed headstone;
    Watching the wild white butterflies pass
    Through the fairy forests of grass,
    Two little children with brown legs bare
        Were merrily, merrily
    Weaving a wonderful daisy-chain,
    And chanting the rhyme that was graven there
        Over and over and over again;
    While the warm wind came and played with their hair
        And laughed and was gone
    Out, far out to the foam-flowered lea
    Like an ocean-wandering memory.

        _Eighteen hundred and forty-three,
        Dan Trevennick was lost at sea;
        And, buried here at her husband's side
        Lies the body of Joan, his bride,
        Who, a little while after she lost him, died._

    This was the rhyme that was graven there,
      And the children chanted it quietly;
    As the warm wind came and played with their hair,
    And rustled the golden grasses against the stone,
        And laughed and was gone
    To waken the wild white flowers of the sea,
    And sing a song of the days that were,
    A song of memory, gay and blind
    As the sun on the graves that it left behind;
    For this, ah this, was the song of the wind.


    I

    She sat on the tarred old jetty, with a sailor's careless ease,
    And the clear waves danced around her feet and kissed her tawny knees;
    Her head was bare, and her thick black hair was coiled behind a throat
    Chiselled as hard and bright and bold as the bow of a sailing boat.


    II

    Her eyes were blue, and her jersey was blue as the lapping,
        slapping seas,
    And the rose in her cheek was painted red by the brisk Atlantic breeze;
    And she sat and waited her father's craft, while Dan Trevennick's eyes
    Were sheepishly watching her sunlit smiles and her soft contented
        sighs.


    III

    For he thought he would give up his good black pipe and his evening
        glasses of beer,
    And blunder to chapel on Sundays again for a holy Christian year,
    To hold that foot in his hard rough hand and kiss the least of
        its toes:
    Then he swore at himself for a great damned fool; which he probably
        was, God knows.


    IV

    Often in summer twilights, too, he would sit on a coil of rope,
    As the stars came out in their twinkling crowds to play with wonder
        and hope,
    While he watched the side of her clear-cut face as she sat on the
        jetty and fished,
    And even to help her coil her line was more than he hoped or wished.


    V

    But once or twice o'er the dark green tide he saw with a solemn
        delight,
    Hooked and splashing after her line, a flash and a streak of white;
    As hand over hand she hauled it up, a great black conger eel,
    For Dan Trevennick to kill as it squirmed with its head beneath
        his heel.


    VI

    And at last, with a crash and a sunset cry from the low soft evening
        star,
    A shadowy schooner suddenly loomed o'er the dark green oily bar;
    With fairy-like spars and misty masts in the golden dusk of gloaming,
    Where the last white seamew's wide-spread wings were wistfully
        westward roaming;


    VII

    Then the song of the foreign seamen rose in the magical evening air,
    Faint and far away, as it seemed, but they knew it was, ah, so near;
    Far away as her heart from Dan's as he sheepishly drew to her side,
    And near as her heart when he kissed the lips of his newly promised
        bride.


    VIII

    And when they were riding away in the train on the night of their
        honeymoon,
    What a whisper tingled against her cheek as it blushed like a
        rose in June;
    For she said, "I am tired and ready for bed," and Dan said, "So
        am I;"
    And she murmured, "Are you tired, too, poor Dan?" and he answered
        her, "No, dear, why?"


    IX

    It was never a problem-play, at least, and the end of it all is this;
    They were drowned in the bliss of their ignorance and buried the rest
        in a kiss;
    And they loved one another their whole life long, as lovers will
        often do;
    For it never was only the fairy-tales that rang so royally true.


    X

    _The rose in her cheek was painted red by the brisk Atlantic breeze;
    Her eyes were blue, and her jersey was blue as the lapping, slapping
        seas;
    Her head was bare, and her thick black hair was coiled behind a throat
    Chiselled as hard and bright and bold as the bow of a sailing boat._


    XI

        _Eighteen hundred and forty-three,
        Dan Trevennick was lost at sea;
        And, buried here at her husband's side
        Lies the body of Joan, his bride,
        Who, a little while after she lost him, died._




A SONG OF TWO BURDENS


    The round brown sails were reefed and struggling home
      Over the glitter and gloom of the angry deep:
    Dark in the cottage she sang, "Soon, soon, he will come,
      Dreamikin, Drowsy-head, sleep, my little one, sleep."

    Over the glitter and gloom of the angry deep
      Was it only a dream or a shadow that vanished away?
    "Lullaby, little one, sleep, my little one, sleep."
      She sang in a dream as the shadows covered the day.

    Was it only a sail or a shadow that vanished away?
      The boats come home: there is one that will never return;
    But she sang in a dream as the shadows buried the day;
      And she set the supper and begged the fire to burn.

    The boats come home; but one will never return;
      And a strangled cry went up from the struggling sea.
    She sank on her knees and begged the fire to burn,
      "Burn, oh burn, for my love is coming to me!"

    A strangled cry went up from the struggling sea,
      A cry where the ghastly surf to the moon-dawn rolled;
    "Burn, oh burn; for my love is coming to me,
      His hands will be scarred with the ropes and starved with the cold."

    A strangled cry where the foam in the moonlight rolled,
      A bitter cry from the heart of the ghastly sea;
    "His hands will be frozen, the night is dark and cold,
      Burn, oh burn, for my love is coming to me."

    One cry to God from the soul of the shuddering sea,
      One moment of stifling lips and struggling hands;
    "Burn, oh burn; for my love is coming to me;
      And oh, I think the little one understands."

    One moment of stifling lips and struggling hands,
      Then only the glitter and gloom of the angry deep;
    "And oh, I think the little one understands;
      Dreamikin, Drowsy-head, sleep, my little one, sleep."




EARTH-BOUND


    Ghosts? Love would fain believe,
      Earth being so fair, the dead might wish to return!
      Is it so strange if, even in heaven, they yearn
    For the May-time and the dreams it used to give?

    Through dark abysms of Space,
      From strange new spheres where Death has called them now
      May they not, with a crown on every brow,
    Still cry to the loved earth's lost familiar face?

    We two, love, we should come
      Seeking a little refuge from the light
      Of the blinding terrible star-sown Infinite,
    Seeking some sheltering roof, some four-walled home,

    From that too high, too wide
      Communion with the universe and God,
      How glad to creep back to some lane we trod
    Hemmed in with a hawthorn hedge on either side.

    Fresh from death's boundless birth,
      How fond the circled vision of the sea
      Would seem to souls tired of Infinity,
    How kind the soft blue boundaries of earth,

    How rich the nodding spray
      Of pale green leaves that made the sapphire deep
      A background to the dreams of that brief sleep
    We called our life when heaven was far away.

    How strange would be the sight
      Of the little towns and twisted streets again,
      Where all the hurrying works and ways of men
    Would seem a children's game for our delight.

    What boundless heaven could give
      This joy in the strait austere restraints of earth,
      Whereof the dead have felt the immortal dearth
    Who look upon God's face and cannot live?

    Our ghosts would clutch at flowers
      As drowning men at straws, for fear the sea
      Should sweep them back to God's Eternity,
    Still clinging to the day that once was ours.

    No more with fevered brain
      Plunging across the gulfs of Space and Time
      Would we revisit this our earthly clime
    We two, if we could ever come again;

    Not as we came of old,
      But reverencing the flesh we now despise
      And gazing out with consecrated eyes,
    Each of us glad of the other's hand to hold.

    So we should wander nigh
      Our mortal home, and see its little roof
      Keeping the deep eternal night aloof
    And yielding us a refuge from the sky.

    We should steal in, once more,
      Under the cloudy lilac at the gate,
      Up the walled garden, then with hearts elate
    Forget the stars and close our cottage door.

    Oh then, as children use
      To make themselves a little hiding-place,
      We would rejoice in narrowness of space,
    And God should give us nothing more to lose.

    How good it all would seem
      To souls that from the æonian ebb and flow
      Came down to hear once more the to and fro
    Swing o' the clock dictate its hourly theme.

    How dear the strange recall
      From vast antiphonies of joy and pain
      Beyond the grave, to these old books again,
    That cosy lamp, those pictures on the wall.

    Home! Home! The old desire!
      We would shut out the innumerable skies,
      Draw close the curtains, then with patient eyes
      Bend o'er the hearth; laugh at our memories,
    Or watch them crumbling in the crimson fire.




ART, THE HERALD

"The voice of one crying in the wilderness"


    I

    Beyond; beyond; and yet again beyond!
    What went ye out to seek, oh foolish-fond?
      Is not the heart of all things here and now?
    Is not the circle infinite, and the centre
    Everywhere, if ye would but hear and enter?
      Come; the porch bends and the great pillars bow.


    II

    Come; come and see the secret of the sun;
    The sorrow that holds the warring worlds in one;
      The pain that holds Eternity in an hour;
    One God in every seed self-sacrificed,
    One star-eyed, star-crowned universal Christ,
      Re-crucified in every wayside flower.




THE OPTIMIST


    Teach me to live and to forgive
      The death that all must die
    Who pass in slumber through this heaven
      Of earth and sea and sky;
    Who live by grace of Time and Space
      At which their peace is priced;
    And cast their lots upon the robe
      That wraps the cosmic Christ;

    Who cannot see the world-wide Tree
      Where Love lies bleeding still;
    This universal cross of God
      Our star-crowned Igdrasil.

    Teach me to live; I do not ask
      For length of earthly days,
    Or that my heaven-appointed task
      Should fall in pleasant ways;

    If in this hour of warmth and light
      The last great knell were knolled;
    If Death should close mine eyes to-night
      And all the tale be told;

    While I have lips to speak or sing
      And power to draw this breath,
    Shall I not praise my Lord and King
      Above all else, for death?

    When on a golden eve he drove
      His keenest sorrow deep
    Deep in my heart, and called it love;
      I did not wince or weep.

    A wild Hosanna shook the world
      And wakened all the sky,
    As through a white and burning light
      Her passionate face went by.

    When on a golden dawn he called
      My best beloved away,
    I did not shrink or stand appalled
      Before the hopeless day.

    The joy of that triumphant dearth
      And anguish cannot die;
    The joy that casts aside this earth
      For immortality.

    I would not change one word of doom
      Upon the dreadful scroll,
    That gave her body to the tomb
      And freed her fettered soul.

    For now each idle breeze can bring
      The kiss I never seek;
    The nightingale has heard her sing,
      The rose caressed her cheek.

    And every pang of every grief
      That ruled my soul an hour,
    Has given new splendours to the leaf,
      New glories to the flower;

    And melting earth into the heaven
      Whose inmost heart is pain,
    Has drawn the veils apart and given
      Her soul to mine again.




A POST-IMPRESSION


    I

    He sat with his foolish mouth agape at the golden glare of the sea,
      And his wizened and wintry flaxen locks fluttered around his ears,
    And his foolish infinite eyes were full of the sky's own glitter
        and glee,
      As he dandled an old Dutch Doll on his knee and sang the song of
        the spheres.


    II

    _Blue and red and yellow and green they are melting away in the white;
    Hey! but the wise old world was wrong and my idiot heart was right;
    Yes; and the merry-go-round of the stars rolls to my cracked old tune,
    Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    III

    Then he cradled his doll on his crooning heart and cried as a sea-bird
        cries;
      And the hot sun reeled like a drunken god through the violent violet
        vault:
    And the hillside cottage that danced to the deep debauch of the
        perfumed skies
      Grew palsied and white in the purple heath as a pillar of Dead
          Sea salt.


    IV

    There were three gaunt sun-flowers nigh his chair: they were yellow as
        death and tall;
    And they threw their sharp blue shadowy stars on the blind white
        wizard wall;
    And they nodded their heads to the weird old hymn that daunted the light
        of the noon,
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    V

    The little dog laughed and leered with the white of his eye as he
        sidled away
      To stare at the dwarfish hunchback waves that crawled to the foot of
        the hill,
    For his master's infinite mind was wide to the wealth of the night
        and the day;
      The walls were down: it was one with the Deep that only a God
          can fill.


    VI

    Then a tiny maiden of ten sweet summers arrived with a song and
        a smile,
    And she swung on the elfin garden-gate and sung to the sea for
        a while,
    And a phantom face went weeping by and a ghost began to croon
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    VII

    And she followed a butterfly up to his chair; and the moon-calf caught
        at her hand
      And stared at her wide blue startled eyes and muttered, "My dear,
        I have been,
    In fact, I am there at this moment, I think, in a wonderful fairy-land:"
      And he bent and he whispered it low in her ear--"_I know why the
        grass is green._


    VIII

    "I know why the daisy is white, my dear, I know why the seas are blue;
    I know that the world is a dream, my dear, and I know that the dream
        is true;
    I know why the rose and the toad-stool grow, as a curse and a
        crimson boon,
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    IX

    "If I gaze at a rose, do you know, it grows till it overshadows
        the earth,
      Like a wonderful Tree of Knowledge, my dear, the Tree of our evil
        and good;
    But I dare not tell you the terrible vision that gave the toad-stool
        birth,
      The dream of a heart that breaks, my dear, and a Tree that is
        bitter with blood.


    X

    "Oh, Love may wander wide as the wind that blows from sea to sea,
    But a wooden dream, for me, my dear, and a painted memory;
    For the God that has bidden the toad-stool grow has writ in his
        cosmic rune,
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._"


    XI

    Then he stared at the child and he laughed aloud, and she suddenly
        screamed and fled,
      As he dreamed of enticing her out thro' the ferns to a quarry
        that gapped the hill,
    To hurtle her down and grin as her gold hair scattered around
        her head
      Far, far below, like a sunflower disk, so crimson-spattered
        and still.


    XII

    "Ah, hush!" he cried; and his dark old eyes were wet with a sacred love
    As he kissed the wooden face of his doll and winked at the skies above,
    "I know, I know why the toad-stools grow, and the rest of the world
        will, soon;
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._"


    XIII

    "_Blue and red and yellow and green they are all mixed up in the white;
    Hey! but the wise old world was wrong and my idiot heart was right;
    Yes; and the merry-go-round of the stars rolls to my cracked old tune,
    Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._"




THE BARREL-ORGAN


    There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And the music's not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
      And fulfilled it with the sunset glow;
    And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
      That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light;
    And they've given it a glory and a part to play again
      In the Symphony that rules the day and night.

    And now it's marching onward through the realms of old romance,
      And trolling out a fond familiar tune,
    And now it's roaring cannon down to fight the King of France,
      And now it's prattling softly to the moon,
    And all around the organ there's a sea without a shore
      Of human joys and wonders and regrets;
    To remember and to recompense the music evermore
      For what the cold machinery forgets....

    Yes; as the music changes,
      Like a prismatic glass,
    It takes the light and ranges
      Through all the moods that pass;
    Dissects the common carnival
      Of passions and regrets,
    And gives the world a glimpse of all
      The colours it forgets.

    And there _La Traviata_ sighs
      Another sadder song;
    And there _Il Trovatore_ cries
      A tale of deeper wrong;
    And bolder knights to battle go
      With sword and shield and lance,
    Than ever here on earth below
      Have whirled into--_a dance_!--

    Go down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
      Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)
    And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland;
      Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)

    The cherry-trees are seas of bloom and soft perfume and sweet perfume,
      The cherry-trees are seas of bloom (and oh, so near to London!)
    And there they say, when dawn is high and all the world's a blaze of sky
      The cuckoo, though he's very shy, will sing a song for London.

    The Dorian nightingale is rare and yet they say you'll hear him there
      At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
    The linnet and the throstle, too, and after dark the long halloo
      And golden-eyed _tu-whit, tu-whoo_ of owls that ogle London.

    For Noah hardly knew a bird of any kind that isn't heard
      At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
    And when the rose begins to pout and all the chestnut spires are out
      You'll hear the rest without a doubt, all chorussing for London:--

    _Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)
    And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)_

    And then the troubadour begins to thrill the golden street,
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And in all the gaudy busses there are scores of weary feet
    Marking time, sweet time, with a dull mechanic beat,
    And a thousand hearts are plunging to a love they'll never meet,
    Through the meadows of the sunset, through the poppies and the wheat,
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    Verdi, Verdi, when you wrote _Il Trovatore_ did you dream
      Of the City when the sun sinks low,
    Of the organ and the monkey and the many-coloured stream
    On the Piccadilly pavement, of the myriad eyes that seem
    To be litten for a moment with a wild Italian gleam
    As _A che la morte_ parodies the world's eternal theme
      And pulses with the sunset-glow.

    There's a thief, perhaps, that listens with a face of frozen stone
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    There's a portly man of business with a balance of his own,
    There's a clerk and there's a butcher of a soft reposeful tone.
    And they're all of them returning to the heavens they have known:
    They are crammed and jammed in busses and--they're each of them alone
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a very modish woman and her smile is very bland
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And her hansom jingles onward, but her little jewelled hand
    Is clenched a little tighter and she cannot understand
    What she wants or why she wanders to that undiscovered land,
    For the parties there are not at all the sort of thing she planned,
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a rowing man that listens and his heart is crying out
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    For the barge, the eight, the Isis, and the coach's whoop and shout,
    For the minute-gun, the counting and the long dishevelled rout,
    For the howl along the tow-path and a fate that's still in doubt,
    For a roughened oar to handle and a race to think about
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a labourer that listens to the voices of the dead
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And his hand begins to tremble and his face to smoulder red
    As he sees a loafer watching him and--there he turns his head
    And stares into the sunset where his April love is fled,
    For he hears her softly singing and his lonely soul is led
      Through the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's an old and haggard demi-rep, it's ringing in her ears,
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    With the wild and empty sorrow of the love that blights and sears,
    Oh, and if she hurries onward, then be sure, be sure she hears,
    Hears and bears the bitter burden of the unforgotten years,
    And her laugh's a little harsher and her eyes are brimmed with tears
      For the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    Though the music's only Verdi there's a world to make it sweet
    Just as yonder yellow sunset where the earth and heaven meet
    Mellows all the sooty City! Hark, a hundred thousand feet
    Are marching on to glory through the poppies and the wheat
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    So it's Jeremiah, Jeremiah,
      What have you to say
    When you meet the garland girls
      Tripping on their way?

    All around my gala hat
      I wear a wreath of roses
    (A long and lonely year it is
      I've waited for the May!)
    If any one should ask you,
      The reason why I wear it is--
    My own love, my true love
      Is coming home to-day.

    And it's buy a bunch of violets for the lady
      (_It's lilac-time in London; it's lilac-time in London!_)
    Buy a bunch of violets for the lady
      While the sky burns blue above:

    On the other side the street you'll find it shady
      (_It's lilac-time in London; it's lilac-time in London!_)
    But buy a bunch of violets for the lady,
      And tell her she's your own true love.

    There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
      In the City as the sun sinks glittering and slow;
    And the music's not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
    And enriched it with the harmonies that make a song complete
    In the deeper heavens of music where the night and morning meet,
      As it dies into the sunset-glow;
    And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
      That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light,
    And they've given it a glory and a part to play again
      In the Symphony that rules the day and night.

    And there, as the music changes,
      The song runs round again.
    Once more it turns and ranges
      Through all its joy and pain,
    Dissects the common carnival
      Of passions and regrets;
    And the wheeling world remembers all
      The wheeling song forgets.

    Once more _La Traviata_ sighs
      Another sadder song:
    Once more _Il Trovatore_ cries
      A tale of deeper wrong;
    Once more the knights to battle go
      With sword and shield and lance
    Till once, once more, the shattered foe
      Has whirled into--_a dance_!

    _Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)
    And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!_)




THE LITANY OF WAR


    Sandalphon, whose white wings to heaven upbear
            The weight of human prayer,
    Stood silent in the still eternal Light
            Of God, one dreadful night.
    His wings were clogged with blood and foul with mire,
            His body seared with fire.
    "Hast thou no word for Me?" the Master said.
            The angel sank his head:

    "Word from the nations of the East and West,"
            He moaned, "that blood is best.
    The patriot prayers of either half of earth,
            Hear Thou, and judge their worth.
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
            First, the first nation's prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord!_'

    "Pure as the first, as passionate in trust
            That their own cause is just;
    Puppets as fond in those dark hands of greed;
            As fervent in their creed;
    As blindly moved, as utterly betrayed,
            As urgent for Thine aid;
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear
            The second nation's prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord._'

    "Over their slaughtered children, one great cry
            From either enemy!
    From either host, thigh-deep in filth and shame,
            One prayer, one and the same;
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
            From East and West, one prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord._'"

    Then, on the Cross of His creative pain,
            God bowed His head again.
    Then, East and West, over all seas and lands,
            Out-stretched His piercèd hands.
    "And yet," Sandalphon whispered, "men deny
            The Eternal Calvary."




THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

[_Written in answer to certain scientific pronouncements_]


    I

    _In the beginning?_--Slowly grope we back
            Along the narrowing track,
    Back to the deserts of the world's pale prime,
            The mire, the clay, the slime;
    And then ... what then? Surely to something less;
            Back, back, to Nothingness!


    II

    You dare not halt upon that dwindling way!
            There is no gulf to stay
    Your footsteps to the last. Go back you must!
            Far, far below the dust,
    Descend, descend! Grade by dissolving grade,
            We follow, unafraid!
    Dissolve, dissolve this moving world of men
            Into thin air--and then?


    III

    O pioneers, O warriors of the Light,
            In that abysmal night,
    Will you have courage, then, to rise and tell
            Earth of this miracle?
    Will you have courage, then, to bow the head,
            And say, when all is said--

    "Out of this Nothingness arose our thought!
            This blank abysmal Nought
    Woke, and brought forth that lighted City street,
            Those towers, that armoured fleet?" ...


    IV

    When you have seen those vacant primal skies
            Beyond the centuries.
    Watched the pale mists across their darkness flow,
            As in a lantern-show,
    Weaving, by merest "chance," out of thin air,
            Pageants of praise and prayer;
    Watched the great hills like clouds arise and set,
            And one--named Olivet;
    When you have seen, as a shadow passing away,
            One child clasp hands and pray;
    When you have seen emerge from that dark mire
            One martyr, ringed with fire;
    Or, from that Nothingness, by special grace,
            One woman's love-lit face, ...


    V

    Will you have courage, then, to front that law
            (From which your sophists draw
    Their only right to flout one human creed)
            That nothing can proceed--
    Not even thought, not even love--from less
            Than its own nothingness?
    The law is yours! But dare you waive your pride,
            And kneel where you denied?
    The law is yours! Dare you re-kindle, then,
            One faith for faithless men,
    And say you found, on that dark road you trod,
            _In the beginning--GOD_?




THE LAST BATTLE


    Kings of the earth, Kings of the earth, the trumpet rings for warning,
      And like the golden swords that ray from out the setting sun
    The shout goes out of the trumpet mouth across the hills of morning,
      Wake; for the last great battle dawns and all the wars are done.

    Now all the plains of Europe smoke with marching hooves of thunder,
      And through each ragged mountain-gorge the guns begin to gleam;
    And round a hundred cities where the women watch and wonder,
      The tramp of passing armies aches and faints into a dream.

    The King of Ind is drawing nigh: a hundred leagues are clouded
      Along his loud earth-shaking march from east to western sea:
    The King o' the Setting Sun is here and all the seas are shrouded
      With sails that carry half the world to front Eternity.

    Soon shall the darkness roll around the grappling of the nations,
      A darkness lit with deadly gleams of blood and steel and fire;
    Soon shall the last great pæan of earth's war-worn generations
      Roar through the thunder-clouded air round War's red funeral pyre.

    But here defeat and victory are both allied with heaven,
      The enfolding sky makes every foe the centre of her dome,
    Each fights for God and his own right, and unto each is given
      The right to find the heart of heaven where'er he finds his home.

    O, who shall win, and who shall lose, and who shall take the glory
      Here at the meeting of the roads, where every cause is right?
    O, who shall live, and who shall die, and who shall tell the story?
      Each strikes for faith and fatherland in that immortal fight.

    High on the grey old hills of Time the last immortal rally,
      Under the storm of the last great tattered flag, shall laugh to see
    The blood of Armageddon roll from every smoking valley,
      Shall laugh aloud, then rush on death for God and chivalry.

    Kings of the earth, Kings of the earth, O, which of you then
        shall inherit
      The Kingdom, the Power and the Glory? for the world's old light
        grows dim
    And the cry of you all goes up all night to the dark enfolding Spirit,
      Each of you fights for God and home; but God, ah, what of Him?




THE PARADOX

"I Am that I Am"


    I

    All that is broken shall be mended;
        All that is lost shall be found;
        I will bind up every wound
    When that which is begun shall be ended.
    Not peace I brought among you but a sword
        To divide the night from the day,
    When I sent My worlds forth in their battle-array
        To die and to live,
        To give and to receive,
          Saith the Lord.


    II

    Of old time they said none is good save our God;
    But ye that have seen how the ages have shrunk from my rod,
    And how red is the wine-press wherein at my bidding they trod,
    Have answered and said that with Eden I fashioned the snake,
    That I mould you of clay for a moment, then mar you and break,
    And there is none evil but I, the supreme Evil, God.
        Lo, I say unto both, I am neither;
        But greater than either;
    For meeting and mingling in Me they become neither evil nor good;
    Their cycle is rounded, they know neither hunger nor food,
    They need neither sickle nor seed-time, nor root nor fruit,
        They are ultimate, infinite, absolute.
    Therefore I say unto all that have sinned,
        East and West and South and North
        The wings of my measureless love go forth
    To cover you all: they are free as the wings of the wind.


    III

    Consider the troubled waters of the sea
        Which never rest;
    As the wandering waves are ye;
        Yet assuaged and appeased and forgiven,
        As the seas are gathered together under the infinite glory of
            heaven,
        I gather you all to my breast.
    But the sins and the creeds and the sorrows that trouble the sea
        Relapse and subside,
    Chiming like chords in a world-wide symphony
        As they cease to chide;
    For they break and they are broken of sound and hue,
    And they meet and they murmur and they mingle anew,
    Interweaving, intervolving, like waves: they have no stay:
    They are all made as one with the deep, when they sink and are vanished
        away;
    Yea, all is toned at a turn of the tide
    To a calm and golden harmony;
    But I--shall I wonder or greatly care,
        For their depth or their height?
    Shall it be more than a song in my sight
    How many wandering waves there were,
    Or how many colours and changes of light?
        It is your eyes that see
    And take heed of these things: they were fashioned for you, not for Me.


    IV

    With the stars and the clouds I have clothed Myself here for your eyes
    To behold That which Is. I have set forth the strength of the skies
    As one draweth a picture before you to make your hearts wise;
    That the infinite souls I have fashioned may know as I know,
                    Visibly revealed
                    In the flowers of the field,
    Yea, declared by the stars in their courses, the tides in their flow,
    And the clash of the world's wide battle as it sways to and fro,
                    Flashing forth as a flame
                    The unnameable Name,
                    The ineffable Word,
                        _I am the Lord._


    V

    I am the End to which the whole world strives:
      Therefore are ye girdled with a wild desire and shod
    With sorrow; for among you all no soul
    Shall ever cease or sleep or reach its goal
    Of union and communion with the Whole,
      Or rest content with less than being God.
    Still, as unending asymptotes, your lives
      In all their myriad wandering ways
    Approach Me with the progress of the golden days;
      Approach Me; for my love contrives
    That ye should have the glory of this
        For ever; yea, that life should blend
        With life and only vanish away
        From day to wider wealthier day,
    Like still increasing spheres of light that melt and merge in
          wider spheres
    Even as the infinite years of the past melt in the infinite
          future years.
        Each new delight of sense,
        Each hope, each love, each fear,
        Widens, relumes and recreates each sphere,
    From a new ring and nimbus of pre-eminence.
    I am the Sphere without circumference:
    I only and for ever comprehend
    All others that within me meet and blend.
        Death is but the blinding kiss
        Of two finite infinities;
        Two finite infinite orbs
      The splendour of the greater of which absorbs
    The less, though both like Love have no beginning and no end.


    VI

    Therefore is Love's own breath
    Like Knowledge, a continual death;
    And all his laughter and kisses and tears,
      And woven wiles of peace and strife,
    That ever widen thus your temporal spheres,
    Are making of the memory of your former years
      A very death in life.


    VII

                  I am that I am;
                  Ye are evil and good;
    With colour and glory and story and song ye are fed as with food:
                  The cold and the heat,
                  The bitter and the sweet,
    The calm and the tempest fulfil my Word;
    Yet will ye complain of my two-edged sword
    That has fashioned the finite and mortal and given you the sweetness
        of strife,
                  The blackness and whiteness,
                  The darkness and brightness,
    Which sever your souls from the formless and void and hold you
        fast-fettered to life?


    VIII

        Behold now, is Life not good?
        Yea, is it not also much more than the food,
    More than the raiment, more than the breath?
        Yet Strife is its name!
    Say, which will ye cast out first from the furnace, the fuel or
        the flame?
    Would ye all be as I am; and know neither evil nor good; neither
        life; neither death;
    Or mix with the void and the formless till all were as one and
        the same?


    IX

    I am that I am; the Container of all things: kneel, lift up your hands
    To the high Consummation of good and of evil which none understands;
    The divine Paradox, the ineffable Word, in whose light the poor souls
        that ye trod
    Underfoot as too vile for their fellows are at terrible union with God!
        Am I not over both evil and good,
        The righteous man and the shedder of blood?
            Shall I save or slay?
        I am neither the night nor the day,
            Saith the Lord.
    Judge not, oh ye that are round my footstool, judge not, ere the hour
        be born
        That shall laugh you also to scorn.

    X

    Ah, yet I say unto all that have sinned,
      East and West and South and North
      The wings of my measureless love go forth
    To cover you all: they are free as the wings of the wind.


    XI

    But one thing is needful; and ye shall be true
      To yourselves and the goal and the God that ye seek;
    Yea, the day and the night shall requite it to you
      If ye love one another, if your love be not weak.


    XII

    Since I sent out my worlds in their battle-array
                    To die and to live,
                    To give and to receive,
    Not peace, not peace, I have brought among you but a sword,
      To divide the night from the day,
                    Saith the Lord;
    Yet all that is broken shall be mended,
                    And all that is lost shall be found,
                    I will bind up every wound,
    When that which is begun shall be ended.




THE PROGRESS OF LOVE

(A LYRICAL SYMPHONY)


    I

    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.
    The woodbine whispers, low and sweet and low,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    The firwoods murmur and the sea-waves know
      The message that the setting sun shall send.
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.


    II

    And God sighed in the sunset; and the sea
      Chanted the soft recessional of Time
    Against the golden shores of mystery;

    And ever as that long low change and chime
      With one slow sob of molten music yearned
    Westward, it seemed as if the Love sublime

    Almost uttered itself, where the waves burned
      In little flower-soft flames of rose and green
    That woke to seaward, while the tides returned

    Rising and falling, ruffled and serene,
      With all the mirrored tints of heaven above
    Shimmering through their mystic myriad sheen.

    As a dove's burnished breast throbbing with love
      Swells and subsides to call her soft-eyed mate
    Home through the rosy gloom of glen or grove,

    So when the greenwood noon was growing late
      The sea called softly through the waste of years,
    Called to the star that still can consecrate

    The holy golden haze of human tears
      Which tinges every sunset with our grief
    Until the perfect Paraclete appears.

    Ah, the long sigh that yields the world relief
      Rose and relapsed across Eternity,
    Making a joy of sorrows that are brief,

    As, o'er the bright enchantment of the sea,
      Facing the towers of that old City of Pain
    Which stands upon the shores of mystery

    And frowns across the immeasurable main,
      Venus among her cloudy sunset flowers
    Woke; and earth melted into heaven again.

    For even the City's immemorial towers
      Were tinted into secret tone and time,
    Like old forgotten tombs that age embowers

    With muffling roses and with mossy rime
      Until they seem no monument of ours,
    But one more note in earth's accordant chime.

    O Love, Love, Love, all dreams, desires and powers,
      Were but as chords of that ineffable psalm;
    And all the long blue lapse of summer hours,

    And all the breathing sunset's golden balm
      By that æonian sorrow were resolved
    As dew into the music's infinite calm,

    Through which the suns and moons and stars revolved
      According to the song's divine decree,
    Till Time was but a tide of intervolved

    And interweaving worlds of melody;
      _In other worlds I loved you, long ago_,--
    The angelic citoles fainted o'er the sea;

    And seraph citerns answered, sweet and low,
      From where the sunset and the moonrise blend,--
    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago_;

    _Love that hath no beginning hath no end_;
      O Love, Love, Love, the bitter City of Pain
    Bidding the golden echoes westward wend,

    Chimed in accordant undertone again:
      Though every grey old tower rose like a tomb
    To mock the glory of the shoreless main

    They could but strike such discords as illume
      The music with strange gleams of utter light
    And hallow all the valley's rosy gloom.

    And there, though greyly sinking out of sight
      Before the wonders of the sky and sea,
    Back through the valley, back into the night,

    While mystery melted into mystery,
      The City still rebuffed the far sweet West
    That dimmed her sorrows with infinity;

    Yet sometimes yearning o'er the sea's bright breast
      To that remote Avilion would she gaze
    Where all lost loves and weary warriors rest.

    Then she remembered, through that golden haze,
      (Oh faint as flowers the rose-white waves resound)
    Her Arthur whom she loved in the dead days,

    And how he sailed to heal him of his wound,
      And how he lives and reigns eternally
    Where now that unknown love is throned and crowned

    Who laid his bleeding head against her knee
      And loosed the bitter breast-plate and unbound
    His casque and brought him strangely o'er the sea,

    And how she reigns beside him on that shore
      For ever (Yrma, queen, bend down to me)
    And they twain have no sorrow any more.


    III

    They have forgotten all that vanished away
    When life's dark night died into death's bright day
    They have forgotten all except the gleam
    Of light when once he kissed her in a dream
    Once on the lips and once upon the brow
    In the white orb of God's transcendent Now;
    And even then he knew that, long before,
    Their eyes had met upon some distant shore;
    Yea; that most lonely and immortal face
    Which dwells beyond the dreams of time and space
    Bowed down to him from out the happy place
    And whispered to him, low and sweet and low
    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago_;
    And then he knew his love could never die
    Because his queen was throned beyond the sky
    And called him to his own immortal sphere
    Forgetting Launcelot and Guinevere.

    So Yrma reigns with Arthur, and they know
    They loved on earth a million years ago;
      And watched the sea-waves wistfully westward wend;
    And heard a voice whispering in their flow,
    And calling through the silent sunset-glow,
    _Love that hath no beginning hath no end._


    IV

    It was about the dawn of day
      I heard Etain and Anwyl say
    The waving ferns are a fairy forest,
      It is time, it is time to wander away;

    For the dew is bright on the heather bells,
    And the breeze in the clover sways and swells,
      As the waves on the blue sea wake and wander,
    Over and under the braes and dells.

    She was eight years old that day,
    Full of laughter and play;
      Eight years old and Anwyl nine,--
    Two young lovers were they.

    Two young lovers were they,
      Born in the City of Pain;
    There was never a song in the world so gay
      As the song of the child, Etain;

    There was never a laugh so sweet
      With the ripple of fairy bells,
    And never a fairy foot so fleet
      Dancing down the woodland dells!

    She was eight years old that day,
    Two young lovers were they.

    There was never a sea of mystical gleams
      Glooming under enchanted skies
    Deep as the dark miraculous dreams
      In Anwyl's haunted eyes.

    There was never a glory of light
      Around the carolling lark
    As Etain's eyes were brave and bright
      To daunt the coming dark.

    Two young lovers were they
      Born in the City of Pain;
    There was never a song in the world so gay
      As the song of the child, Etain;

    Blithe as the wind in the trees,
      Blithe as the bird on the bough,
    Blithe as the bees in the sweet Heart's-ease
      Where Love lies bleeding now.


    V

    And God sighed in the sunset; and the sea
      Forgot her sorrow, and all the breathless West
    Grew quiet as the blue tranquillity

    That clad the broken mountain's brilliant breast,
      Over the City, with deep heather-bloom
    Heaving from crag to crag in sweet unrest,

    A sea of dim rich colour and warm perfume
      Whose billows rocked the drowsy honey-bee
    Among the golden isles of gorse and broom

    Like some enchanted ancient argosy
      Drunkenly blundering over seas of dream
    Past unimagined isles of mystery,
    Over whose yellow sands the soft waves cream,
      And sunbeams float and toss across the bare
    Rose-white arms and perilous breasts that gleam

    Where sirens wind their glossy golden hair;
      Oh, miles on miles, the honeyed heather-bloom
    Heaving its purple through the high bright air

    Rolled a silent glory of gleam and gloom
      From mossy crag to crag and crest to crest
    Untroubled by the valley's depth of doom.

    The hawk dropped down into the pine-forest
      And, far below, the lavrock ruffled her wings
    Blossomwise over her winsome secret nest.

    Then suddenly, softly, as when a fairy sings
      Out of the heart of a rose in the heart of the fern,
    Or in the floating starlight faintly rings

    The frail blue hare-bells--turn again, and turn,
      Under and over, the silvery crescents cry
    To where the crimson fox-glove belfries burn

    And with a deeper softer peal reply,
      There came a ripple of music through the roses
    That rustled on the dimmest rim of sky

    Where many a frame of fretted leaves encloses
      For lovers wandering in the fern-wet wood
    An arch of summer sea that softly dozes

    As if all mysteries were understood:
      Yrma, my queen, what love could understand
    That faint sweet music, _God saith all is good_,

    As those two children, hand in sunburnt hand,
      Over the blithe blue hills and far away
    Wandered into their own green fairyland?


    VI

    For the song is lost that shook the dew
      Where the wild musk-roses glisten,
    When the sunset dreamed that a dream was true
      And the birds were hushed to listen.

    The song is lost that shook the night
      With wings of richer fire,
    Where the years had touched their eyes with light
      And their souls with a new desire;

    And the new delight of the strange old story
      Burned in the flower-soft skies,
    And nine more years with a darker glory
      Had deepened the light of her eyes;

    But lost, oh more than lost the song
      That shook the rose to tears,
    As hand in hand they danced along
      Through childhood's everlasting years.

    "Oh, Love has wings," the linnet sings;
      But the dead return no more, no more;
    And the sea is breaking its old grey heart
      Against the golden shore.

    She was eight years old that day,
    Two young lovers were they.

    If every song as they danced along
      Paused on the springing spray;
    Is there never a bird in the wide greenwood
      Will hush its heart to-day?

    There's never a leaf with dew impearled
      To make their pathway sweet,
    And never a blossom in all the world
      That knows the kiss of their feet.

    No light to-night declares the word
      That thrilled the blossomed bough,
    And stilled the happy singing bird
      That none can silence now.

    The weary nightingale may sob
      With her bleeding breast against a thorn,
    And the wild white rose with every throb
      Grow red as the laugh of morn;

    With wings outspread she sinks her head
      But Love returns no more, no more;
    And the sea is breaking its old grey heart
      Against the golden shore.

    Born in the City of Pain;
      Ah, who knows, who knows
    When Death shall turn to delight again
      Or a wound to a red, red rose?

    Eight years old that day,
    Full of laughter and play;
      Eight years old and Anwyl nine,--
    Two young lovers were they.


    VII

    And down the scented heather-drowsy hills
      The barefoot children wandered, hand in hand,
    And paddled through the laughing silver rills
      In quest of fairyland;
    And in each little sunburnt hand a spray,
      A purple fox-glove bell-branch lightly swung,
    And Anwyl told Etain how, far away,
      One day he wandered through the dreamland dells
    And watched the moonlit fairies as they sung
      And tolled the fox-glove bells;
    And oh, how sweetly, sweetly to and fro
    The fragrance of the music reeled and rung
      Under the loaded boughs of starry May.

    And God sighed in the sunset, and the sea
    Grew quieter than the hills: the mystery
    Of ocean, earth and sky was like a word
      Uttered, but all unheard,
    Uttered by every wave and cloud and leaf
    With all the immortal glory of mortal grief;
    And every wave that broke its heart of gold
      In music on the rainbow-dazzled shore
    Seemed telling, strangely telling, evermore
      A story that must still remain untold.

    Oh, _Once upon a time_, and o'er and o'er
      As aye the _Happy ever after_ came
    The enchanted waves lavished their faery lore

    And tossed a foam-bow and a rosy flame
      Around the whispers of the creaming foam,
    Till the old rapture with the new sweet name

    Through all the old romance began to roam,
      And Anwyl, gazing out across the sea,
    Dreamed that he heard the distance whisper "Come."

    "Etain," he murmured softly and wistfully,
      With the soul's wakening wonder in his eyes,
    "Is it not strange to think that there can be

    "No end for ever and ever to those skies,
      No shore beyond, or if there be a shore
    Still without end the world beyond it lies;

    "Think; think, Etain;" and all his faery lore
      Mixed with the faith that brought all gods to birth
    And sees new heavens transcend for evermore

    The poor impossibilities of earth;
      But Etain only laughed: the world to her
    Was one sweet smile of very present mirth;

    Its flowers were only flowers, common or rare;
      Her soul was like a little garden closed
    By rose-clad walls, a place of southern air
    Islanded from the Mystery that reposed
      Its vast and brooding wings on that abyss
    Through which like little clouds that dreamed and dozed

    The thoughts of Anwyl wandered toward some bliss
      Unknown, unfathomed, far, how far away,
    Where God has gathered all the eternities
      Into strange heavens, beyond the night and day.


    VIII

    And over the rolling golden bay,
    In the funeral pomp of the dying day,
      The bell of Time was wistfully tolling
    A million million years away;

    And over the heather-drowsy hill
    Where the burdened bees were buzzing still,
      The two little sun-bright barefoot children
    Wandered down at the flowers' own will;

    For still as the bell in the sunset tolled,
    The meadow-sweet and the mary-gold
      And the purple orchis kissed their ankles
    And lured them over the listening wold.

    And the feathery billows of blue-gold grass
    Bowed and murmured and bade them pass,
      Where a sigh of the sea-wind softly told them
    _There is no Time--Time never was_.

    And what if a sorrow were tolled to rest
    Where the rich light mellowed away in the West,
      As a glory of fruit in an autumn orchard
    Heaped and asleep o'er the sea's ripe breast?

    Why should they heed it, what should they know
    Of the years that come or the years that go,
      With the warm blue sky around and above them
    And the wild thyme whispering to and fro?

    For they heard in the dreamy dawn of day
    A fairy harper faintly play,
      Follow me, follow me, little children,
    Over the hills and far away;

    Where the dew is bright on the heather-bells,
    And the breeze in the clover sways and swells,
      As the waves on the blue sea wake and wander,
    Over and under the braes and dells.

    And the hare-bells tinkled and rang Ding dong
    Bell in the dell as they danced along,
      And their feet were stained on the hills with honey,
    And crushing the clover till evensong.

    And, oh the ripples that rolled in rhyme
    Under the wild blue banks of thyme,
      To the answering rhyme of the rolling ocean's
    Golden glory of change and chime!

    For they came to a stream and her fairy lover
    Caught at her hand and swung her over,
      And the broad wet buttercups laughed and gilded
    Their golden knees in the deep sweet clover.

    There was never a lavrock up in the skies
    Blithe as the laugh of their lips and eyes,
      As they glanced and glittered across the meadows
    To waken the sleepy butterflies.

    There was never a wave on the sea so gay
    As the light that danced on their homeward way
      Where the waving ferns were a fairy forest
    And a thousand years as yesterday.

        _She was eight years old that day,
        Full of laughter and play;
          Eight years old and Anwyl nine,--
        Two young lovers were they._

    And when the clouds like folded sheep
    Were drowsing over the drowsy deep,
      And like a rose in a golden cradle
    Anwyl breathed on the breast of sleep,

    Or ever the petals and leaves were furled
    At the vesper-song of the sunset-world,
      The sleepy young rose of nine sweet summers
    Dreamed in his rose-bed cosily curled.

    And what if the light of his nine bright years
    Glistened with laughter or glimmered with tears,
      Or gleamed like a mystic globe around him
    White as the light of the sphere of spheres?

    And what if a glory of angels there,
    Starring an orb of ineffable air,
      Came floating down from the Gates of jasper
    That melt into flowers at a maiden's prayer?

    And what if he dreamed of a fairy face
    Wondering out of some happy place,
      Quietly as a star at sunset
    Shines in the rosy dreams of space?

    For only as far as the west wind blows
    The sweets of a swinging full-blown rose,
      Eight years old and queen of the lilies
    Little Etain slept--ah, how close!

    At a flower-cry over the moonlit lane
    In a cottage of roses dreamed Etain,
      And their purple shadows kissed at her lattice
    And dappled her sigh-soft counterpane;

    And or ever Etain with her golden head
    Had nestled to sleep in her lily-white bed,
      She breathed a dream to her fairy lover,
    _Please, God, bless Anwyl and me_, she said.

    And a song arose in the rose-white West,
    And a whisper of wings o'er the sea's bright breast,
      And a cry where the moon's old miracle wakened
    A glory of pearl o'er the pine-forest.

    Why should they heed it? What should they know
    Of the years to come or the years to go?
      With the starry skies around and above them
    And the roses whispering to and fro.

    Ah, was it a song of the mystic morn
    When into their beating hearts the thorn
      Should pierce through the red wet crumpled roses
    And all the sorrow of love be born?

    Ah, was it a cry of the wild wayside
    Whereby one day they must surely ride,
      Out of the purple garden of passion
    To Calvary, to be crucified?

    Only the sound of the distant sea
    Broke on the shores of Mystery,
      And tolled as a bell might toll for sorrow
    Till Time be tombed in Eternity;

    And in their dreams they only heard
    Far away, one secret bird
      Sing, till the passionate purple twilight
    Throbbed with the wonder of one sweet word:

    One sweet word and the wonder awoke,
    And the leaves and the flowers and the starlight spoke
      In silent rapture the strange old secret
    That none e'er knew till the death-dawn broke;

    One sweet whisper, and hand in hand
    They wandered in dreams through fairyland,
      Rapt in the star-bright mystical music
    Which only a child can understand.

    But never a child in the world can tell
    The wonderful tale he knows so well,
      Though ever as old Time dies in the sunset
    It tolls and tolls like a distant bell.

    _Love, love, love_; and they hardly knew
    The sense of the glory that round them grew;
      But the world was a wide enchanted garden;
    And the song, the song, the song rang true.

    And they danced with the fairies in emerald rings
    Arched by the light of their rainbow wings,
      And they heard the wild green Harper striking
    A starlight over the golden strings.

    _Love, oh love_; and they roamed once more
    Through a forest of flowers on a fairy shore,
      And the sky was a wild bright laugh of wonder
    And the West was a dream of the years of yore.

    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end:
    The heather whispers low and sweet and low,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    The meadows murmur and the firwoods know
      The message that the kindling East shall send;
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.


    IX

    Out of the deep, my dream, out of the deep,
    Yrma, thy voice came to me in my sleep,
    And through a rainbow woven of human tears
    I saw two lovers wandering down the years;
    Two children, first, that roamed a sunset land,
    And then two lovers wandering hand in hand,
    Forgetful of their childhood's Paradise,
    For nine more years had darkened in their eyes,
    And heaven itself could hardly find again
    Anwyl, the star-child, or the flower, Etain.

    For on a day in May, as through the wood
    With earth's new passion beating in his blood
    He went alone, an empty-hearted youth,
    Seeking he knew not what white flower of truth
    Or beauty, on all sides he seemed to see
    Swift subtle hints of some new harmony,
    Yet all unheard, ideal, and incomplete,
    A silent song compact of hopes and fears,
    A music such as lights the wandering feet
    Of Yrma when on earth she reappears.
    And he forgot that sad grey City of Pain,
    For all earth's old romance returned again,
    And as he went, his dreaming soul grew glad
    To think that he might meet with Galahad
    Or Parsifal in some green glade of fern,
    Or see between the boughs a helmet burn
    And hear a joyous laugh kindle the sky
    As through the wood Sir Launcelot rode by
    With face upturned to take the sun like wine.
    Ah, was it love that made the whole world shine
    Like some great angel's face, blinded with bliss,
    While Anwyl dreamed of bold Sir Amadis
    And Guinevere's white arms and Iseult's kiss,
    And that glad island in a golden sea
    Where Arthur lives and reigns eternally?
    Surely the heavens were one wide rose-white flame
    As down the path to meet him Yrma came;
    Ah, was it Yrma, with those radiant eyes,
    That came to greet and lead him through the skies,
    The skies that gloomed and gleamed so far above
    The little wandering prayers of human love?...
    He had forgotten all except the gleam
    Of light when once he kissed her in a dream, ...
    For surely then he knew that long before
    Their eyes had met upon some distant shore....
    Ah, was it Yrma whose red lips he met
    Between the branches, where the leaves were wet?
    Etain or Yrma, for it seemed her face
    Bent down upon him from some happy place
    And whispered to him, low and sweet and low,
    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago!_
    And he, too, knew his love could never die,
    Because his queen was throned beyond the sky.

    Yet In sweet mortal eyes he met her now
    And kissed Etain beneath the hawthorn bough,
    And dared to dream his infinite dream was true
    On earth and reign with Etain, dream he knew
    Why leaves were green and sides were fresh and blue;
    Yea, dream he knew, as children dream they know
    They knew all this a million years ago,
      And watched the sea-waves wistfully westward wend
    And heard a voice whispering in their flow
    And calling through the silent sunset-glow
      _Love that hath no beginning hath no end._

    Ah, could they see in the Valley of Gloom
    That clove the cliffs behind the City;
    Ah, could they hear in the forest of Doom
    The peril that neared without pause or pity?
    Behind the veils of ivy and vine,
    Wild musk-roses and white woodbine,
    In glens that were wan as with moonlit tears
    And rosy with ghosts of eglantine
    And pale as with lilies of long-past years,
    Ah, could they see, could they hear, could they know
    Behind that beautiful outward show,
    Behind the pomp and glory of life
    That seething old anarchic strife?
    For there in many a dim blue glade
    Where the rank red poppies burned,
    And if perchance some dreamer strayed
    He nevermore returned,
    Cold incarnate memories
    Of earth's retributory throes,
    Deadly desires and agonies
    Dark as the worm that never dies,
    In the outer night arose,
    And waited under those wonderful skies
    With Hydra heads and mocking eyes
    That winked upon the waning West
    From out the gloom of the oak-forest,
    Till all the wild profound of wood
    That o'er the haunted valley slept
    Glowed with eyes like pools of blood
    As, lusting after a hideous food,
    Through the haggard vistas crept
    Without a cry, without a hiss,
    The serpent broods of the abyss.
    Ancestral folds in darkness furled
    Since the beginnings of the world.
    Ring upon awful ring uprose
    That obscure heritage of foes,
    The exceeding bitter heritage
    Which still a jealous God bestows
    From inappellable age to age,
    The ghostly worms that softly move
    Through every grey old corse of love
    And creep across the coffined years
    To batten on our blood and tears;
    And there were hooded shapes of death
    Gaunt and grey, cruel and blind,
    Stealing softly as a breath
    Through the woods that loured behind
    The City; hooded shapes of fear
    Slowly, slowly stealing near;
    While all the gloom that round them rolled
    With intertwisting coils grew cold.
    And there with leer and gap-toothed grin
    Many a gaunt ancestral Sin
    With clutching fingers, white and thin,
    Strove to put the boughs aside;
    And still before them all would glide
    Down the wavering moon-white track
    One lissom figure, clad in black;
    Who wept at mirth and mocked at pain
    And murmured a song of the wind and the rain;
    His laugh was wild with a secret grief;
    His eyes were deep like woodland pools;
    And, once and again, as his face drew near
    In a rosy gloaming of eglantere,
    All the ghosts that gathered there
    Bowed together, naming his name:
    Lead us, ah thou _Shadow of a Leaf_,
    Child and master of all our shame,
    Fool of Doubt and King of Fools.

    Now the linnet had ended his evensong,
    And the lark dropt down from his last wild ditty
    And ruffled his wings and his speckled breast
    Blossomwise over his June-sweet nest;
    While winging wistfully into the West
    As a fallen petal is wafted along
    The last white sea-mew sought for rest;
    And, over the gleaming heave and swell
    Of the swinging seas,
    Drowsily breathed the dreaming breeze.
    Then, suddenly, out of the Valley of Gloom
    That clove the cliffs behind the City,
    Out of the silent forest of Doom
    That clothed the valley with clouds of fear
    Swelled the boom of a distant bell
    Once, and the towers of the City of Pain
    Echoed it, without hope or pity.
    The tale of that tolling who can tell?
    That dark old music who shall declare?
    Who shall interpret the song of the bell?

    _Is it nothing to you, all ye that hear_,
    Sorrowed the bell, _Is it nothing to you?
    Is it nothing to you?_ the shore-wind cried,
    _Is it nothing to you?_ the cliffs replied.
    But the low light laughed and the skies were blue,
    And this was only the song of the bell.


    X

    ANWYL

    A darkened easement in a darker room
      Was all his home, whence weary and bowed and white
    He watched across the slowly gathering gloom
      The slowly westering light.

    Bitterness in his heavy-clouded eyes,
      Bitterness as of heaven's intestine wars
    Brooded; he looked upon the unfathomed skies
      And whispered--to the stars--

    Some day, he said, she will forget all this
      That she calls life, and looking far above
    See throned among the great eternities
      This dream of mine, this love;

    Love that has given my soul these wings of fire
      To beat in glory above the sapphire sea,
    Until the wings of the infinite desire
      Close in infinity;

    Love that has taken the glory of hawthorn boughs,
      And all the dreaming beauty of hazel skies,
    As ministers to the radiance of her brows
      And haunted April eyes;

    Love that is hidden so deep beneath the dust
      Of little daily duties and delights,
    Till that reproachful face of hers grows just
      And God at last requites

    A soul whose dream was deeper than the skies,
      A heart whose hope was wider than the sea,
    Yet could not enter through his true love's eyes
      Their grey infinity.

    And so I know I wound her all day long
      Because my heart must seem so far away;
    And even my love completes the silent wrong
      For all that it can say

    Seems vast and meaningless to mortal sense;
      Its vague desire can never reach its goal
    Till knowledge vanishes in omniscience
      And God surrounds her soul,
    Breaking its barriers down and flooding in
      Through all her wounds in one almighty tide,
    Mingling her soul with that great Love wherein
      My soul waits, glorified.


    XI

    ETAIN

    My love is dying, dying in my heart;
      There is no song in heaven for such as I
    Who watch the days and years of youth depart,
      The bloom decay and die;

    The rose that withers in the hollow cheek,
      The leaden rings that mark us old and wise;
    And Time that writes what Pity dares not speak
      Around the fading eyes.

    He dreams he loves; but only loves his dream;
      And in his dream he never can forget
    Abana seems a so much mightier stream
      And Pharpar wider yet;

    The little deeds of love that light the shrine
      Of common daily duties with such gleams
    Of heaven, to me are scarcely less divine
      Than those poor wandering dreams

    Of deeds that never happen! I give him this,
      This heart he cannot find in heaven above;
    This heart, this heart of all the eternities,
      This life of mine, this love;

    Love that is lord of all the world at once
      And never bade the encircled spirit roam
    To the circle's bound, beyond the moons and suns,
      But makes each heart its home,
    And every home the heart of Space and Time,
      And each and all a heaven if love could reign;
    One infinite untranscended heaven sublime
      With God's own joy and pain.

    Why, that was what God meant, to set us here
      In Eden, when he saw that all was good;
    And we have made the sun black with despair,
      And turned the moon to blood.

    So has Love taught me that too learnèd tongue,
      And in his poorer wisdom made me wise;
    I grew so proud of the red drops we wrung
      From all philosophies.

    My heart is narrow, foolish, what you will;
      But this I know God meant who set us here,
    And gave each soul the Infinities to fulfil
      From its own widening sphere.

    To annex new regions to the soul's domain,
      To expand the circle of the golden hours,
    Till it enfolds again and yet again
      New heavens, new fields, new flowers,

    Oh, this is well; but still the central heart
      Is here at home, not wandering like the wind
    That gathers nothing, but must still depart
      Leaving a waste behind.

    Where is the song I sang that April morn,
      When all the poet in his eyes awoke
    My sleeping heart to heaven; and love was born?
      For while the glad day broke

    We met; and as the softly kindling skies
      Thrilled through the scented vistas of the wood
    I felt the sudden love-light in his eyes
      Kindle my beating blood.

    _Happy day, happy day,
    Chasing the clouds of the night away
      And bidding the dreams of the dawn depart
    Over the freshening April blue,
      Till the blossoms awake to welcome the May,
    And the world is made anew;
      And the blackbird sings on the dancing spray
    With eyes of glistening dew;
      "Happy, happy, happy day;"
    For he knows that his love is true;
      He knows that his love is true, my heart,
    He knows that his love is true!_

    I cannot sing it: these tears blind me: love,
      O love, come back before it is too late,
    Why, even Christ came down to us from above:
      I think His love was great;

    Yet he stood knocking, knocking at the door
      Until his piteous hands were worn with scars;
    He did not hide that crown of love he wore
      Among the lonely stars.

    This round of hours, the daily flowers I cull
      Are more to me than all the rolling spheres,
    A wounded bird at hand more pitiful
      Than some great seraph's tears.

    How should I join the great wise choir above
      With my starved spirit's pale inhuman dearth,
    Who never heard the cry of heavenly love
      Rise from the sweet-souled earth?

    Yet it is I he needs, and I for whom
      His greed exceeds, his dreams fly wide of the mark!
    Is it all self? I wander in the gloom;
      The ways of God grow dark;
    I watch the rose that withers in the cheek,
      The leaden rings that mark us old and wise;
    And Time that writes what Pity dares not speak
      Around the fading eyes.


    XII

    And ever as Anwyl went the unknown end
      Faded before him, back and back and back
    He saw new empty heavens for ever bend
      Over his endless track;

    And memory, burning with new hopeless fire,
      Showed him how every passing infinite hour
    Made some new Crucifix for the World's Desire
      Is some new wayside flower:

    He saw what joy and beauty owed to death;
      How all the world was one great sacrifice
    Of Him, in whom all creatures that draw breath
      Share God's eternal skies;

    How Love is lord of all the world at once;
      And never bids the encircled spirit roam
    To the circle's bound, beyond the moons and suns,
      But makes each heart its home,

    And every home the heart of Space and Time,
      And each and all a heaven if love could reign
    One infinite untranscended heaven sublime
      With God's own joy and pain.


    XIII

    Out of the deep, my dream, out of the deep,
    A little child came to him in his sleep
    And led him back to what was Paradise
    Before the years had darkened in his eyes,
    And showed him what he ne'er could lose again--
    The light that once enshrined the child Etain.

    Ah, was it Yrma with those radiant eyes
    That came to greet and lead him through the skies;
    Ay; all the world was one wide rose-white flame,
    As down the path to meet him Yrma came
    And caught the child up in her arms and cried,
    This is my child that moved in Etain's side,
    Thy child and Etain's: I the unknown ideal
    And she the rich, the incarnate, breathing real
    Are one; for me thou never canst attain
    But by the love I yield thee for Etain;
    Even as through Christ thy soul allays its dearth,
    Love's heaven is only compassed upon earth;
    And by that love, in thine own Etain's eyes
    Thou shalt find all God's untranscended skies.

    As of old, as of old, with Etain that day,
    Over the hills, and far away,
      He roamed thro' the fairy forests of fern:
    Two young lovers were they.

    And God sighed in the sunset, and the sea
    Grew quieter than the hills: the mystery
    Of ocean, earth and sky was like a word
      Uttered, but all unheard,
    Uttered by every wave and cloud and leaf
    With all the immortal glory of mortal grief;
    And every wave that broke its heart of gold
      In music on the rainbow-dazzled shore
    Seemed telling, strangely telling, evermore
      A story that must still remain untold.

    Oh, _Once upon a time_, and o'er and o'er
      As aye the _Happy ever after_ came
    The enchanted waves lavished their faery lore

    And tossed a foam-bow and a rosy flame
      Around the whispers of the creaming foam,
    Till the old rapture with the new sweet name
      Through all the old romance began to roam.


    XIV

    And those two lovers only heard
      --Oh, love is a dream that knows no waking--
    Far away, one secret bird,
    Where all the roses breathed one word,
    And every crispel on the beach--
      Oh, love is a sea that is ever breaking!--
    Lisped it in a sweeter speech;
    As hand in hand, by the sunset sea
    That breaks on the shores of mystery,
    They stood in the gates of the City of Pain
    To watch the wild waves flutter and beat
    In roses of white soft light at their feet,
    Roses of delicate music and light,
    Music and moonlight under their feet.
    Crumbling and flashing and softly crashing
    In rainbow colours that dazzle and wane
    And wither and waken and, wild with delight,
    Dance and dance to a mystic tune
    And scatter their leaves in a flower-soft rain
    Over the shimmering golden shore
    Between the West and the waking moon,
    Between the sunset and the night;
    And then they sigh for the years of yore
    And gather their glory together again,
    Petal by petal and gleam by gleam,
    Till, all in one rushing rose-bright stream
    They dazzle back to the deep once more,
    For the dream of the sea is an endless dream,
    And love is a sea that hath no shore,
    And the roses dance as they danced before.


    XV

    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end:
    Low to her heart he breathed it, sweet and low;
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    This is a word that all the sea-waves know
      And whisper as through the shoreless West they wend,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.


    XVI

    "Yet love can die!" she murmured once again;
      For this was in that City by the Sea,
    That old grey City of Pain,
      Built on the shifting shores of Mystery
    And mocked by all the immeasurable main.
      "Love lives to die!"
    Under the deep eternal sky
      His deeper voice caught up that deep refrain;

    "A year ago, and under yonder sun
    Earth had no Heaven to hold our hearts in one!
      For me there was no love, afar or nigh:
    And, O, if love were thus in time begun,
      Love, even our love, in time must surely die."
    Then memory murmured, "No";
    And he remembered, a million years ago,
      He saw the sea-waves wistfully westward wend;
    And heard her voice whispering in their flow
    And calling through the silent sunset-glow.
      _Love that hath no beginning hath no end._

    "Love dies to live!" How wild, how deep the joy
    That knows no death can e'er destroy
      What cannot bear destruction! By these eyes
      I know that, ere the fashioning of the skies,
    Or ever the sun and moon and stars were made
    I loved you. Sweet, I am no more afraid.

    "Love lives to die!"
    Under the deep eternal sky
      Her wild sweet voice caught up that deep refrain:
    There, in that silent City by the Sea,
    Listening the wild-wave music of Infinity,
      There, in that old grey City of mortal pain,
    Their voices mingled in mystic unison
      With that immortal harmony
    Which holds the warring worlds in one.

    Their Voice, one Voice, yet manifold,
    Possessed the seas, the fields, the sky,
    With utterance of the dream that cannot die;
    Possessed the West's wild rose and dappled gold,
    And that old secret of the setting sun
    Which, to the glory of Eternity,
    Time, tolling like a distant bell,
    Evermore faints to tell,
    And, ever telling, never yet has told.
      One, and yet manifold
    Arose their Voice, oh strangely one again
    With murmurs of the immeasurable main;
      As, far beyond earth's cloudy bars,
    Their Soul surpassed the sunset and the stars,
      And all the heights and depths of temporal pain,
    Till seas of seraph music round them rolled.

    And in that mystic plane
    They felt their mortal years
    Break away as a dream of pain
    Breaks in a stream of tears.

    Love, of whom life had birth,
    See now, is death not sweet?
    Love, is this heaven or earth?
    Both are beneath thy feet.

    Nay, both within thy heart!
    O Love, the glory nears;
    The Gates of Pearl are flung apart,
    The Rose of Heaven appears.

    Across the deeps of change,
    Like pangs of visible song,
    What angel-spirits, remote and strange,
    Thrill through the starry throng?

    And oh, what wind that blows
    Over the mystic Tree,
    What whisper of the sacred Rose,
    What murmur of the sapphire Sea,
    What dreams that faint and fail
    From harps of burning gold,
    But tell in heaven the sweet old tale
    An earthly sunset told?

    Hark! like a holy bell
    Over that spirit Sea,
    Time, in the world it loves so well,
    Tolls for Eternity.

    Earth calls us once again,
    And, through the mystic Gleam,
    The grey old City of mortal pain
    Dawns on the heavenly dream.

    Sweet as the voice of birds
    At dawn, the years return,
    With little songs and sacred words
    Of human hearts that yearn.

    The sweet same waves resound
    Along our earthly shore;
    But now this earth we lost and found
    Is heaven for evermore.

    Hark! how the cosmic choir,
    In sea and flower and sun,
    Recalls that triumph of desire
    Which made all music one:

    One universal soul,
    Completing joy with pain,
    And harmonising with the Whole
    The temporal refrain,

    Until from hill and plain,
    From bud and blossom and tree,
    From shadow and shining after rain,
    From cloud and clovered bee,
    From earth and sea and sky,
    From laughter and from tears,
    One molten golden harmony
    Fulfils the yearning years.

    _Love, of whom death had birth,
    See now, is life not sweet?
    Love, is this heaven or earth?
    Both are beneath thy feet._

    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end;
    The sea-waves whisper, low and sweet and low,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    The May-boughs murmur and the roses know
      The message that the dawning moon shall send;
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end._




THE FOREST OF WILD THYME

_DEDICATED TO HELEN, ROSIE, AND BEATRIX_



    PERSONS OF THE TALE

    OURSELVES
    FATHER
    MOTHER
    LITTLE BOY BLUE
    THE HIDEOUS HERMIT
    THE KING OF FAIRY-LAND
    PEASE-BLOSSOM
    MUSTARD-SEED
    Dragons, Fairies, Mammoths, Angels, etc.


APOLOGIA

    One more hour to wander free
    With Puck on his unbridled bee
      Thro' heather-forests, leagues of bloom,
    Our childhood's maze of scent and sun!
      Forbear awhile your notes of doom,
    Dear Critics, give me still this one
      Swift hour to hunt the fairy gleam
      That flutters thro' the unfettered dream.
    It mocks me as it flies, I know:
    All too soon the gleam will go;
      Yet I love it and shall love
    My dream that brooks no narrower bars
      Than bind the darkening heavens above,
    My Jack o'Lanthorn of the stars:
      Then, I'll follow it no more,
      I'll light the lamp: I'll close the door.


PRELUDE

    Hush! if you remember how we sailed to old Japan,
      Peterkin was with us then, our little brother Peterkin!
    Now we've lost him, so they say: I think the tall thin man
    Must have come and touched him with his curious twinkling fan
      And taken him away again, our merry little Peterkin;
    He'll be frightened all alone; we'll find him if we can;
      Come and look for Peterkin, poor little Peterkin.

    No one would believe us if we told them what we know,
      Or they wouldn't grieve for Peterkin, merry little Peterkin!
    If they'd only watched us roaming through the streets of Miyako,
    And travelling in a palanquin where parents never go,
      And seen the golden gardens where we wandered once with Peterkin,
    And smelt the purple orchards where the cherry-blossoms blow,
      They wouldn't mourn for Peterkin, merry little Peterkin.

    Put away your muskets, lay aside the drum,
      Hang it by the wooden sword we made for little Peterkin!
    He was once our trumpeter, now his bugle's dumb,
    Pile your arms beneath it, for the owlet light is come,
      We'll wander through the roses where we marched of old with Peterkin,
    We'll search the summer sunset where the Hybla beehives hum,
      And--if we meet a fairy there--we'll ask for news of Peterkin.

    He was once our cabin-boy and cooked the sweets for tea;
      And O, we've sailed around the world with laughing little Peterkin;
    From nursery floor to pantry door we've roamed the mighty sea,
    And come to port below the stairs in distant Caribee,
      But wheresoe'er we sailed we took our little lubber Peterkin,
    Because his wide grey eyes believed much more than ours could see,
      And so we liked our Peterkin, our trusty little Peterkin.

    Peterkin, Peterkin, I think if you came back
      The captain of our host to-day should be the bugler Peterkin,
    And he should lead our smugglers up that steep and narrow track,
    A band of noble brigands, bearing each a mighty pack
      Crammed with lace and jewels to the secret cave of Peterkin,
    And he should wear the biggest boots and make his pistol crack,--
      The Spanish cloak, the velvet mask, we'd give them all to Peterkin.

    Come, my brother pirates, I am tired of play;
      Come and look for Peterkin, little brother Peterkin,
    Our merry little comrade that the fairies took away,
    For people think we've lost him, and when we come to say
      Our good-night prayers to mother, if we pray for little Peterkin
    Her eyes are very sorrowful, she turns her head away.
      Come and look for Peterkin, merry little Peterkin.

    God bless little Peterkin, wherever he may be!
      Come and look for Peterkin, lonely little Peterkin:
    I wonder if they've taken him again across the sea
    From the town of Wonder-Wander and the Amfalula tree
      To the land of many marvels where we roamed of old with Peterkin,
    The land of blue pagodas and the flowery fields of tea!
      Come and look for Peterkin, poor little Peterkin.


PART I

THE SPLENDID SECRET

    Now father stood engaged in talk
    With mother on that narrow walk
    Between the laurels (where we play
    At Red-skins lurking for their prey)
    And the grey old wall of roses
    Where the Persian kitten dozes
    And the sunlight sleeps upon
    Crannies of the crumbling stone
    --So hot it is you scarce can bear
    Your naked hand upon it there,
    Though there luxuriating in heat
    With a slow and gorgeous beat
    White-winged currant-moths display
    Their spots of black and gold all day.--

    Well, since we greatly wished to know
    Whether we too might some day go
    Where little Peterkin had gone
    Without one word and all alone,
    We crept up through the laurels there
    Hoping that we might overhear
    The splendid secret, darkly great,
    Of Peterkin's mysterious fate;
    And on what high adventure bound
    He left our pleasant garden-ground,
    Whether for old Japan once more
    He voyaged from the dim blue shore,
    Or whether he set out to run
    By candle-light to Babylon.

    We just missed something father said
    About a young prince that was dead,
    A little warrior that had fought
    And failed: how hopes were brought to nought
    He said, and mortals made to bow
     Before the Juggernaut of Death,
    And all the world was darker now,
     For Time's grey lips and icy breath
    Had blown out all the enchanted lights
    That burned in Love's Arabian nights;
    And now he could not understand
    Mother's mystic fairy-land,
    "Land of the dead, poor fairy-tale,"
    He murmured, and her face grew pale,
    And then with great soft shining eyes
    She leant to him--she looked so wise--
    And, with her cheek against his cheek,
    We heard her, ah so softly, speak.

    "Husband, there was a happy day,
    Long ago, in love's young May,
    When with a wild-flower in your hand
      You echoed that dead poet's cry--
    '_Little flower, but if I could understand!_'
      And you saw it had roots in the depths of the sky,
    And there in that smallest bud lay furled
    The secret and meaning of all the world."

    He shook his head and then he tried
    To kiss her, but she only cried
    And turned her face away and said,
    "You come between me and my dead!
    His soul is near me, night and day,
    But you would drive it far away;
    And you shall never kiss me now
    Until you lift that brave old brow
    Of faith I know so well; or else
    Refute the tale the skylark tells,
    Tarnish the glory of that May,
    Explain the Smallest Flower away."
    And still he said, "Poor fairy-tales,
    How terribly their starlight pales
    Before the solemn sun of truth
    That rises o'er the grave of youth!"

    "Is heaven a fairy-tale?" she said,--
    And once again he shook his head;
    And yet we ne'er could understand
    Why heaven should _not_ be fairy-land,
    A part of heaven at least, and why
    The thought of it made mother cry,
    And why they went away so sad,
      And father still quite unforgiven,
    For what could children be but glad
      To find a fairy-land in heaven?

    And as we talked it o'er we found
    Our brains were really spinning round;
    But Dick, our eldest, late returned
    From school, by all the lore he'd learned
    Declared that we should seek the lost
    Smallest Flower at any cost.
    For, since within its leaves lay furled
    The secret of the whole wide world,
    He thought that we might learn therein
    The whereabouts of Peterkin;
    And, if we found the Flower, we knew
    Father would be forgiven, too;
    And mother's kiss atone for all
    The quarrel by the rose-hung wall;
    We knew, not how we knew not why,
      But Dick it was who bade us try,
    Dick made it all seem plain and clear,
    And Dick it is who helps us here
    To tell this tale of fairy-land
    In words we scarce can understand.
    For ere another golden hour
      Had passed, our anxious parents found
      We'd left the scented garden-ground
    To seek--the Smallest Flower.


PART II

THE FIRST DISCOVERY

    O, grown-ups cannot understand
      And grown-ups never will,
    How short's the way to fairy-land
      Across the purple hill:
    They smile: their smile is very bland,
      Their eyes are wise and chill;
    And yet--at just a child's command--
      The world's an Eden still.

    Under the cloudy lilac-tree,
      Out at the garden-gate,
    We stole, a little band of three,
      To tempt our fairy fate.
    There was no human eye to see,
      No voice to bid us wait;
    The gardener had gone home to tea,
      The hour was very late.

    I wonder if you've ever dreamed,
      In summer's noonday sleep,
    Of what the thyme and heather seemed
      To ladybirds that creep
    Like little crimson shimmering gems
    Between the tiny twisted stems
      Of fairy forests deep;
    And what it looks like as they pass
    Through jungles of the golden grass.

    If you could suddenly become
      As small a thing as they,
    A midget-child, a new Tom Thumb,
      A little gauze-winged fay,
    Oh then, as through the mighty shades
    Of wild thyme woods and violet glades
      You groped your forest-way,
    How fraught each fragrant bough would be
    With dark o'erhanging mystery.

    How high the forest aisles would loom,
      What wondrous wings would beat
    Through gloamings loaded with perfume
      In many a rich retreat,
    While trees like purple censers bowed
    And swung beneath a swooning cloud
      Mysteriously sweet,
    Where flowers that haunt no mortal clime
    Burden the Forest of Wild Thyme.

    We'd watched the bats and beetles flit
      Through sunset-coloured air
    The night that we discovered it
      And all the heavens were bare:
    We'd seen the colours melt and pass
    Like silent ghosts across the grass
      To sleep--our hearts knew where;
    And so we rose, and hand in hand
    We sought the gates of fairy-land.

    For Peterkin, oh Peterkin,
      The cry was in our ears,
    A fairy clamour, clear and thin
      From lands beyond the years;
    A wistful note, a dying fall
    As of the fairy bugle-call
      Some dreamful changeling hears,
    And pines within his mortal home
    Once more through fairy-land to roam.

    We left behind the pleasant row
      Of cottage window-panes,
    The village inn's red-curtained glow,
      The lovers in the lanes;
    And stout of heart and strong of will
    We climbed the purple perfumed hill,
      And hummed the sweet refrains
    Of fairy tunes the tall thin man
    Taught us of old in Old Japan.

    So by the tall wide-barred church-gate
      Through which we all could pass
    We came to where that curious plate,
      That foolish plate of brass,
    Said Peterkin was fast asleep
    Beneath a cold and ugly heap
      Of earth and stones and grass.
    It was a splendid place for play,
    That churchyard, on a summer's day;

    A splendid place for hide-and-seek
      Between the grey old stones;
    Where even grown-ups used to speak
      In awestruck whispering tones;
    And here and there the grass ran wild
    In jungles for the creeping child,
      And there were elfin zones
    Of twisted flowers and words in rhyme
    And great sweet cushions of wild thyme.

    So in a wild thyme snuggery there
      We stayed awhile to rest;
    A bell was calling folk to prayer:
      One star was in the West:
    The cottage lights grew far away,
    The whole sky seemed to waver and sway
      Above our fragrant nest;
    And from a distant dreamland moon
    Once more we heard that fairy tune:

    Why, mother once had sung it us
      When, ere we went to bed,
    She told the tale of Pyramus,
      How Thisbe found him dead
    And mourned his eyes as green as leeks,
    His cherry nose, his cowslip cheeks.

    That tune would oft around us float
      Since on a golden noon
    We saw the play that Shakespeare wrote
      Of Lion, Wall, and Moon;
    Ah, hark--the ancient fairy theme--
    _Following darkness like a dream!_

    The very song Will Shakespeare sang,
    The music that through Sherwood rang
    And Arden and that forest glade
    Where Hermie and Lysander strayed,
    And Puck cried out with impish glee,
    _Lord, what fools these mortals be!_
    Though the masquerade was mute
    Of Quince and Snout and Snug and Flute,
    And Bottom with his donkey's head
    Decked with roses, white and red,
    Though the fairies had forsaken
    Sherwood now and faintly shaken
    The forest-scents from off their feet,
    Yet from some divine retreat
    Came the music, sweet and clear,
    To hang upon the raptured ear
    With the free unfettered sway
    Of blossoms in the moon of May.
    Hark! the luscious fluttering
    Of flower-soft words that kiss and cling,
    And part again with sweet farewells,
    And rhyme and chime like fairy-bells.

    "_I know a bank where the wild thyme blows
    Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
    Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
    With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine._"

    Out of the undiscovered land
      So sweetly rang the song,
    We dreamed we wandered, hand in hand,
      The fragrant aisles along,
    Where long ago had gone to dwell
    In some enchanted distant dell
      The outlawed fairy throng
    When out of Sherwood's wildest glen
    They sank, forsaking mortal men.

    And as we dreamed, the shadowy ground
      Seemed gradually to swell;
    And a strange forest rose around,
      But how--we could not tell--
    Purple against a rose-red sky
    The big boughs brooded silently:
      Far off we heard a bell;
    And, suddenly, a great red light
    Smouldered before our startled sight.

    Then came a cry, a fiercer flash,
      And down between the trees
    We saw great crimson figures crash,
      Wild-eyed monstrosities;
    Great dragon-shapes that breathed a flame
    From roaring nostrils as they came:
      We sank upon our knees;
    And looming o'er us, ten yards high,
    Like battle-ships they thundered by.

    And then, as down that mighty dell
      We followed, faint with fear,
    We understood the tolling bell
      That called the monsters there;
    For right in front we saw a house
    Woven of wild mysterious boughs
      Bursting out everywhere
    In crimson flames, and with a shout
    The monsters rushed to put it out.

    And, in a flash, the truth was ours;
      And there we knew--we knew--
    The meaning of those trees like flowers,
      Those boughs of rose and blue,
    And from the world we'd left above
    A voice came crooning like a dove
      To prove the dream was true:
    And this--we knew it by the rhyme
    Must be--the Forest of Wild Thyme.

    For out of the mystical rose-red dome
      Of heaven the voice came murmuring down:
    _Oh, Ladybird, Ladybird, fly away home;
      Your house is on fire and your children are gone._

    We knew, we knew it by the rhyme,
      Though _we_ seemed, after all,
    No tinier, yet the sweet wild thyme
      Towered like a forest tall
    All round us; oh, we knew not how.
    And yet--we knew those monsters now:
      Our dream's divine recall
    Had dwarfed us, as with magic words;
    The dragons were but ladybirds!

    And all around us as we gazed,
    Half glad, half frightened, all amazed,
    The scented clouds of purple smoke
    In lurid gleams of crimson broke;
    And o'er our heads the huge black trees
    Obscured the sky's red mysteries;
    While here and there gigantic wings
    Beat o'er us, and great scaly things
    Fold over monstrous leathern fold
    Out of the smouldering copses rolled;
    And eyes like blood-red pits of flame
    From many a forest-cavern came
    To glare across the blazing glade,
    Till, with the sudden thought dismayed,
    We wondered if we e'er should find
    The mortal home we left behind:
    Fear clutched us in a grisly grasp,
    We gave one wild and white-lipped gasp,
    Then turned and ran, with streaming hair,
    Away, away, and anywhere!

    And hurry-skurry, heart and heel and hand, we tore along,
      And still our flying feet kept time and pattered on for Peterkin,
    For Peterkin, oh Peterkin, it made a kind of song
    To prove the road was right although it seemed so dark and wrong,
      As through the desperate woods we plunged and ploughed for little
        Peterkin,
    Where many a hidden jungle-beast made noises like a gong
      That rolled and roared and rumbled as we rushed along to Peterkin.

    Peterkin, Peterkin, if you could only hear
      And answer us, one little word from little lonely Peterkin
    To take and comfort father, he is sitting in his chair
      In the library: he's listening for your footstep on the stair
    And your patter down the passage, he can only think of Peterkin:
    Come back, come back to father, for to-day he'd let us tear
      His newest book to make a paper-boat for little Peterkin.


PART III

THE HIDEOUS HERMIT

    Ah, what wonders round us rose
      When we dared to pause and look,
    Curious things that seemed all toes,
      Goblins from a picture-book;
    Ants like witches, four feet high,
      Waving all their skinny arms,
    Glared at us and wandered by,
      Muttering their ancestral charms.

    Stately forms in green and gold
      Armour strutted through the glades,
    Just as Hamlet's ghost, we're told,
      Mooned among the midnight shades:

    Once a sort of devil came
    Scattering broken trees about,
    Winged with leather, eyed with flame,--
      He was but a moth, no doubt.

    Here and there, above us clomb
      Feathery clumps of palm on high:
    Those were ferns, of course, but some
      Really seemed to touch the sky;
    Yes; and down one fragrant glade,
      Listening as we onward stole,
    Half delighted, half afraid,
      _Dong_, we heard the hare-bells toll!

    Something told us what that gleam
      Down the glen was brooding o'er;
    Something told us in a dream
      What the bells were tolling for!
    Something told us there was fear,
      Horror, peril, on our way!
    Was it far or was it near?
      _Near_, we heard the night-wind say.

    _Toll_, the music reeled and pealed
      Through the vast and sombre trees,
    Where a rosy light revealed
      Dimmer, sweeter mysteries;
    And, like petals of the rose,
      Fairy fans in beauty beat,
    Light in light--ah, what were those
      Rhymes we heard the night repeat?

    _Toll_, a dream within a dream,
      Up an aisle of rose and blue,
    Up the music's perfumed stream
      Came the words, and then we knew,

    Knew that in that distant glen
      Once again the case was tried,
    Hark!--_Who killed Cock Robin, then?_
      And a tiny voice replied,
              "_I
              killed
              Cock
              Robin!_"

    "_I!_ And who are _You_, sir, pray?"
      Growled a voice that froze our marrow:
    "Who!" we heard the murderer say,
      "Lord, sir, I'm the famous Sparrow,
    And this 'ere's my bow and arrow!
              _I
              killed
              Cock
              Robin!_"

    Then, with one great indrawn breath,
      Such a sighin' and a sobbin'
    Rose all round us for the death
      Of poor, poor Cock Robin,
    Oh, we couldn't bear to wait
    Even to hear the murderer's fate,
    Which we'd often wished to know
    Sitting in the fireside glow
    And with hot revengeful looks
    Searched for in the nursery-books;
    For the Robin and the Wren
    Are such friends to mortal men,
      Such dear friends to mortal men!

    _Toll_; and through the woods once more
      Stole we, drenched with fragrant dew:
    _Toll_; the hare-bell's burden bore
      Deeper meanings than we knew:
    Still it told us there was fear,
      Horror, peril on our way!
    Was it far or was it near?
      _Near_, we heard the night-wind say!

    _Near_; and once or twice we saw
      Something like a monstrous eye,
    Something like a hideous claw
      Steal between us and the sky:
    Still we hummed a dauntless tune
      Trying to think such things might be
    Glimpses of the fairy moon
      Hiding in some hairy tree.

    Yet around us as we went
     Through the glades of rose and blue
    Sweetness with the horror blent
      Wonder-wild in scent and hue:
    Here Aladdin's cavern yawned,
      Jewelled thick with gorgeous dyes;
    There a head of clover dawned
      Like a cloud In eastern skies.

    Hills of topaz, lakes of dew,
      Fairy cliffs of crystal sheen
    Passed we; and the forest's blue
      Sea of branches tossed between:
    Once we saw a gryphon make
      One soft iris as it passed
    Like the curving meteor's wake
      O'er the forest, far and fast.

    Winged with purple, breathing flame,
      Crimson-eyed we saw him go,
    Where--ah! could it be the same
      Cockchafer we used to know?--
    Valley-lilies overhead,
      High aloof in clustered spray,
    Far through heaven their splendour spread,
      Glimmering like the Milky Way.

    Mammoths father calls "extinct,"
      Creatures that the cave-men feared,
    Through that forest walked and blinked,
      Through that jungle crawled and leered;
    Beasts no Nimrod ever knew,
      Woolly bears black and red;
    Crocodiles, we wondered who
      Ever dared to see _them_ fed,

    Were they lizards? If they were,
      They could swallow _us_ with ease;
    But they slumbered quietly there
      In among the mighty trees;
    Red and silver, blue and green,
      Played the moonlight on their scales;
    Golden eyes they had, and lean
      Crookèd legs with cruel nails.

    Yet again, oh, faint and far,
      Came the shadow of a cry,
    Like the calling of a star
      To its brother in the sky;
    Like an echo in a cave
      Where young mermen sound their shells,
    Like the wind across a grave
      Bright with scent of lily-bells.

    Like a fairy hunter's horn
      Sounding in some purple glen
    Sweet revelly to the morn
      And the fairy quest again:
    Then, all round it surged a song
      We could never understand
    Though it lingered with us long,
      And it seemed so sad and grand.


SONG

    _Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,
    Summon the day of deliverance in:
    We are weary of bearing the burden of scorn
      As we yearn for the home that we never shall win;
    For here there is weeping and sorrow and sin.
      And the poor and the weak are a spoil for the strong!
    Ah, when shall the song of the ransomed begin?
      The world is grown weary with waiting so long._

    _Little Boy Blue, you are gallant and brave,
      There was never a doubt in those clear bright eyes.
    Come, challenge the grim dark Gates of the Grave
      As the skylark sings to those infinite skies!
    This world is a dream, say the old and the wise,
      And its rainbows arise o'er the false and the true;
    But the mists of the morning are made of our sighs,--
      Ah, shatter them, scatter them, Little Boy Blue!_

    _Little Boy Blue, if the child-heart knows,
      Sound but a note as a little one may;
    And the thorns of the desert shall bloom with the rose,
      And the Healer shall wipe all tears away;
    Little Boy Blue, we are all astray,
      The sheep's in the meadow, the cow's in the corn,
    Ah, set the world right, as a little one may;
      Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn!_

    Yes; and there between the trees
      Circled with a misty gleam
    Like the light a mourner sees
      Round an angel in a dream;
    Was it he? oh, brave and slim,
      Straight and clad in æry blue,
    Lifting to his lips the dim
      Golden horn? We never knew!

    Never; for a witch's hair
      Flooded all the moonlit sky,
    And he vanished, then and there,
      In the twinkling of an eye:
    Just as either boyish cheek
      Puffed to set the world aright,
    Ere the golden horn could speak
      Round him flowed the purple night.

       *   *   *   *

    At last we came to a round black road
    That tunnelled through the woods and showed,
    Or so we thought, a good clear way
    Back to the upper lands of day;
    Great silken cables overhead
    In many a mighty mesh were spread
    Netting the rounded arch, no doubt
    To keep the weight of leafage out.
    And, as the tunnel narrowed down,
    So thick and close the cords had grown
    No leaf could through their meshes stray,
    And the faint moonlight died away;
    Only a strange grey glimmer shone
    To guide our weary footsteps on,
    Until, tired out, we stood before
    The end, a great grey silken door.

    Then from out a weird old wicket, overgrown with shaggy hair
    Like a weird and wicked eyebrow round a weird and wicked eye,
                  Two great eyeballs and a beard
                  For one ghastly moment peered
    At our faces with a sudden stealthy stare:
                  Then the door was open wide,
                  And a hideous hermit cried
    With a shy and soothing smile from out his lair,
    _Won't you walk into my parlour? I can make you cosy there!_

    And we couldn't quite remember where we'd heard that phrase before,
    As the great grey-bearded ogre stood beside his open door;
    But an echo seemed to answer from a land beyond the sky--
    _Won't you walk into my parlour? said the spider to the fly!_

    Then we looked a little closer at the ogre as he stood
    With his great red eyeballs glowing like two torches in a wood,
    And his mighty speckled belly and his dreadful clutching claws
    And his nose--a horny parrot's beak, his whiskers and his jaws;
    Yet he seemed so sympathetic, and we saw two tears descend,
    As he murmured, "I'm so ugly, but I've lost my dearest friend!
    I tell you most lymphatic'ly, I've yearnings in my soul,"--
    And right along his parrot's beak we saw the tear-drops roll;
    _He's an arrant sentimentalist_, we heard a distant sigh,
    _Won't you weep upon my bosom? said the spider to the fly._

    "If you'd dreamed my dreams of beauty, if you'd seen my works of art,
    If you'd felt the cruel hunger that is gnawing at my heart,
    And the grief that never leaves me and the love I can't forget,
    (For I loved with all the letters in the Chinese alphabet!)
    Oh, you'd all come in to comfort me: you ought to help the weak;
    And I'm full of melting moments; and--I--know--the--thing--you--seek!"
    And the haunting echo answered, _Well, I'm sure you ought to try;
    There's a duty to one's neighbour, said the spider to the fly._

    So we walked into his parlour
      Though a gleam was in his eye;
    And it _was_ the prettiest parlour
      That ever we did spy!

              But we saw by the uncertain
                Misty light, shot through with gleams
              Of many a silken curtain
                Broidered o'er with dreadful dreams,
    That he locked the door behind us! So we stood with bated breath
                In a silence deep as death.

              There were scarlet gleams and crimson
                In the curious foggy grey,
              Like the blood-red light that swims on
                Old canals at fall of day,
    Where the smoke of some great city loops and droops in gorgeous veils
                Round the heavy purple barges' tawny sails.

              Were those creatures gagged and muffled,
                See--there--by that severed head?
              Was it but a breeze that ruffled
                Those dark curtains, splashed with red,
    Ruffled the dark figures on them, made them moan like things in pain?
                How we wished that we were safe at home again.

       *   *   *   *

    "Oh, we want to hear of Peterkin; good sir, you say you know;
    Won't you tell us, won't you put us in the way we want to go?"
    So we pleaded, for he seemed so very full of sighs and tears
    That we couldn't doubt his kindness, and we smothered all our fears;
    But he said, "You must be crazy if you come to me for help;
    Why should I desire to send you to your horrid little whelp?"
    And again, the foolish echo made a far-away reply,
                _Oh, don't come to me for comfort,
                Pray don't look to me for comfort,
    Heavens! you mustn't be so selfish, said the spider to the fly._

    "Still, when the King of Scotland, so to speak, was in a hole,
    He was aided by my brother; it's a story to console
    The convict of the treadmill and the infant with a sum,
    For it teaches you to try again until your kingdom's come!
    The monarch dawdled in that hole for centuries of time
    Until my own twin-brother rose and showed him how to climb:
    He showed him how to swing and sway upon a tiny thread
    Across a mighty precipice, and light upon his head
    Without a single fracture and without a single pain
    If he only did it frequently and tried and tried again:"
    And once again the whisper like a moral wandered by,
    _Perseverance is a virtue, said the spider to the fly._

    Then he moaned, "My heart is hungry; but I fear I cannot eat,
    (Of course I speak entirely now of spiritual meat!)
    For I only fed an hour ago, but if we calmly sat
    While I told you all my troubles in a confidential chat
    It would give me _such_ an appetite to hear you sympathise,
    And I should sleep the better--see, the tears are in my eyes!
    Dead yearnings are such dreadful things, let's keep 'em all alive,--
    Let's sit and talk awhile, my dears; we'll dine, I think, at five."
    And he brought his chair beside us in his most engaging style,
    And began to tell his story with a melancholy smile.--

    "You remember Miss Muffet
    Who sat on a tuffet
    Partaking of curds and whey;
    Well, _I_ am the spider
    Who sat down beside her
      And frightened Miss Muffet away!

    "There was nothing against her!
    An elderly spinster
      Were such a grammatical mate
    For a spider and spinner,
    I swore I would win her,
      I knew I had met with my fate!

    "That love was the purest
    And strongest and surest
      I'd felt since my first thread was spun;
    I know I'm a bogey,
    But _she's_ an old fogey,
      So why in the world did she run?

    "When Bruce was in trouble,
    A spider, my double,
      Encouraged him greatly, they say!
    Now, _why_ should the spider
    Who sat down beside her
      Have frightened Miss Muffet away?"

    He seemed to have much more to tell,
    But we could scarce be listening well,
    Although we tried with all our might
    To look attentive and polite;
    For still afar we heard the thin
    Clear fairy-call to Peterkin;
    Clear as a skylark's mounting song
    It drew our wandering thoughts along.
    Afar, it seemed, yet, ah, so nigh,
    Deep in our dreams it scaled the sky,
    In captive dreams that brooked no bars
    It touched the love that moves the stars,
    And with sweet music's golden tether
    It bound our hearts and heaven together.


SONG

    _Wake, arise, the lake, the skies
      Fade into the faery day;
    Come and sing before our king,
      Heed not Time, the dotard grey;
    Time has given his crown to heaven--
      Ah, how long? Awake, away!_

    Then, as the Hermit rambled on
    In one long listless monotone,
    We heard a wild and mournful groan
    Come rumbling down the tunnelled way;
    A voice, an awful mournful bray,
    Singing some old funereal lay;
    Then solemn footsteps, muffled, dull,
    Approached as if they trod on wool,
    And as they nearer, nearer drew,
    We saw our Host was listening too!

    His bulging eyes began to glow
      Like great red match-heads rubbed at night,
    And then he stole with a grim "O-ho!"
      To that grey old wicket where, out of sight,
    Blandly rubbing his hands and humming,
    He could see, at one glance, whatever was coming.

    He had never been so jubilant or frolicsome before,
    As he scurried on his cruel hairy crutches to the door;
                  And flung it open wide
                  And most hospitably cried,
    "Won't you walk into my parlour? I've some little friends to tea,--
    They'll be highly entertaining to a man of sympathy,
                  Such as you yourself must be!"

    Then the man, for so he seemed,
      (Doubtless one who'd lost his way
    And was dwarfed as we had been!)
      In his ancient suit of black,
    Black upon the verge of green,
      Entered like a ghost that dreamed
    Sadly of some bygone day;
      And he never ceased to sing
    In that awful mournful bray.

    The door closed behind his back;
      He walked round us in a ring,
    And we hoped that he might free us,
      But his tears appeared to blind him,
    For he didn't seem to see us,
      And the Hermit crept behind him
    Like a cat about to spring.

    And the song he sang was this;
      And his nose looked very grand
    As he sang it, with a bliss
      Which we could not understand;
    For his voice was very sad,
    While his nose was proud and glad.

    _Rain, April, rain, thy sunny, sunny tears!
    Through the black boughs the robe of Spring appears,
    Yet, for the ghosts of all the bygone years,
                  Rain, April, rain._

    _Rain, April, rain; the rose will soon be glad;
    Spring will rejoice, a Spring I, too, have had;
    A little while, till I no more be sad,
                  Rain, April, rain._

    And then the spider sprang
      Before we could breathe or speak,
    And one great scream out-rang
      As the terrible horny beak
    Crunched into the Sad Man's head,
      And the terrible hairy claws
    Clutched him around his middle;
      And he opened his lantern-jaws,
    And he gave one twist, one twiddle,
      One kick, and his sorrow was dead.

    And there, as he sucked his bleeding prey,
      The spider leered at us--"You will do,
    My sweet little dears, for another day;
      But this is the sort I like; huh! huh!"

    And there we stood, in frozen fear,
                  Whiter than death,
                  With bated breath;
    And lo! as we thought of Peterkin,
    Father and home and Peterkin,
    Once more that music clear and thin,
    Clear as a skylark's mounting song,
    But nearer now, more sweet, more strong,
    Drew all our wandering thoughts along,
    Until it seemed, a mystic sea
    Of hidden delight and harmony
    Began to ripple and rise all round
    The prison where our hearts lay bound;
    And from sweet heaven's most rosy rim
    There swelled a distant marching hymn
    Which made the hideous Hermit pause
    And listen with lank down-dropt jaws,
    Till, with great bulging eyes of fear,
    He sought the wicket again to peer
    Along the tunnel, as like sweet rain
    We heard the still approaching strain,
    And, under it, the rhythmic beat
    Of multitudinous marching feet.
    Nearer, nearer, they rippled and rang,
    And this was the marching song they sang:--


SONG

    _A fairy band are we
      In fairy-land:
    Singing march we, hand in hand;
      Singing, singing all day long:
      (Some folk never heard a fairy-song!)_

    _Singing, singing,
    When the merry thrush is swinging
      On a springing spray;
    Or when the witch that lives in gloomy caves
    And creeps by night among the graves
      Calls a cloud across the day;
    Cease we never our fairy song,
    March we ever, along, along,
    Down the dale, or up the hill,
    Singing, singing still._

    And suddenly the Hermit turned and ran with all his might
      Through the back-door of his parlour as we thought of little Peterkin;
    And the great grey roof was shattered by a shower of rosy light,
    And the spider-house went floating, torn and tattered through the night
      In a flight of prismy streamers, as a shout went up for Peterkin;
    And lo, the glistening fairy-host stood there arrayed for fight,
      In arms of rose and green and gold, to lead us on to Peterkin.

    And all around us, rippling like a pearl and opal sea,
      The host of fairy faces winked a kindly hint of Peterkin;
    And all around the rosy glade a laugh of fairy glee
    Watched spider-streamers floating up from fragrant tree to tree
      Till the moonlight caught the gossamers and, oh we wished for Peterkin!
    Each rope became a rainbow; but it made us ache to see
      Such a fairy forest-pomp without explaining it to Peterkin.

    Then all the glittering crowd
    With a courtly gesture bowed
    Like a rosy jewelled cloud
      Round a flame,
    As the King of Fairy-land,
    Very dignified and grand,
    Stepped forward to demand
      Whence we came.

    He'd a cloak of gold and green
    Such as caterpillars spin,
    For the fairy ways, I ween,
      Are very frugal;
    He'd a bow that he had borne
    Since the crimson Eden morn,
    And a honeysuckle horn
      For his bugle.

    So we told our tale of faëry to the King of Fairy-land,
      And asked if he could let us know the latest news of Peterkin;
    And he turned him with a courtly smile and waved his jewelled wand
    And cried, _Pease-blossom, Mustard-seed! You know the old command;
      Well; these are little children; you must lead them on to Peterkin._
    Then he knelt, the King of Faëry knelt; his eyes were great and grand
      As he took our hands and kissed them, saying, _Father loves your
        Peterkin!_

    So out they sprang, on either side,
    A light fantastic fairy guide,
    To lead us to the land unknown
    Where little Peterkin was gone;
    And, as we went with timid pace,
    We saw that every fairy face
    In all that moonlit host was wet
    With tears: we never shall forget
    The mystic hush that seemed to fade
    Away like sound, as down the glade
    We passed beyond their zone of light.
    Then through the forest's purple night
    We trotted, at a pleasant speed,
    With gay Pease-blossom and Mustard-seed.


PART IV

PEASE-BLOSSOM AND MUSTARD-SEED

      Shyly we surveyed our guides
    As through the gloomy woods we went
    In the light that the straggling moonbeams lent:
      We envied them their easy strides!
    Pease-blossom in his crimson cap
      And delicate suit of rose-leaf green,
    His crimson sash and his jewelled dagger,
    Strutted along with an elegant swagger
    Which showed that he didn't care one rap
      For anything less than a Fairy Queen:
    His eyes were deep like the eyes of a poet,
      Although his crisp and curly hair
    Certainly didn't seem to show it!
      While Mustard-seed was a devil-may-care
    Epigrammatic and pungent fellow
    Clad in a splendid suit of yellow,
    With emerald stars on his glittering breast
      And eyes that shone with a diamond light:
    They made you feel sure it would always be best
      To tell him the truth: he was not perhaps _quite_
    So polite as Pease-blossom, but then who could be
    _Quite_ such a debonair fairy as he?

    We never could tell you one-half that we heard
    And saw on that journey. For instance, a bird
    Ten times as big as an elephant stood
    By the side of a nest like a great thick wood:
    The clouds in glimmering wreaths were spread
    Behind its vast and shadowy head
    Which rolled at us trembling below. (Its eyes
    Were like great black moons in those pearl-pale skies.)
    And we feared he might take us, perhaps, for a worm.

    But he ruffled his breast with the sound of a storm,
    And snuggled his head with a careless disdain
    Under his huge hunched wing again;
    And Mustard-seed said, as we stole thro' the dark,
    There was nothing to fear: it was only a Lark!

    And so he cheered the way along
      With many a neat little epigram,
      While dear Pease-blossom before him swam
    On a billow of lovely moonlit song,
    Telling us why they had left their home
    In Sherwood, and had hither come
    To dwell in this magical scented clime,
    This dim old Forest of sweet Wild Thyme,

    "Men toil," he said, "from morn till night
    With bleeding hands and blinded sight
    For gold, more gold! They have betrayed
    The trust that in their souls was laid;
    Their fairy birthright they have sold
    For little disks of mortal gold;
    And now they cannot even see
    The gold upon the greenwood tree,
    The wealth of coloured lights that pass
    In soft gradations through the grass,
    The riches of the love untold
    That wakes the day from grey to gold;
    And howsoe'er the moonlight weaves
    Magic webs among the leaves
    Englishmen care little now
    For elves beneath the hawthorn bough:
    Nor if Robin should return
    Dare they of an outlaw learn;
    For them the Smallest Flower is furled,
    Mute is the music of the world;
    And unbelief has driven away
    Beauty from the blossomed spray."

    Then Mustard-seed with diamond eyes
    Taught us to be laughter-wise,
    And he showed us how that Time
    Is much less powerful than a rhyme;
    And that Space is but a dream;
    "For look," he said, with eyes agleam,
    "Now you are become so small
    You think the Thyme a forest tall;
    But underneath your feet you see
    A world of wilder mystery
    Where, if you were smaller yet,
    You would just as soon forget
    This forest, which you'd leave above
    As you have left the home you love!
    For, since the Thyme you used to know
    Seems a forest here below,
    What if you should sink again
    And find there stretched a mighty plain
    Between each grass-blade and the next?
    You'd think till you were quite perplexed!
    Especially if all the flowers
    That lit the sweet Thyme-forest bowers
    Were in that wild transcendent change
    Turned to Temples, great and strange,
    With many a pillared portal high
    And domes that swelled against the sky!
    How foolish, then, you will agree,
    Are those who think that all must see
    The world alike, or those who scorn
    Another who, perchance, was born
    Where--in a different dream from theirs--
    What they call sins to him are prayers!

    "We cannot judge; we cannot know;
    All things mingle; all things flow;
    There's only one thing constant here--
    Love--that untranscended sphere:
    Love, that while all ages run
    Holds the wheeling worlds in one;
    Love that, as your sages tell,
    Soars to heaven and sinks to hell."

    Even as he spoke, we seemed to grow
    Smaller, the Thyme trees seemed to go
    Farther away from us: new dreams
    Flashed out on us with mystic gleams
    Of mighty Temple-domes: deep awe
    Held us all breathless as we saw
    A carven portal glimmering out
    Between new flowers that put to rout
    Our other fancies: in sweet fear
    We tiptoed past, and seemed to hear
    A sound of singing from within
    That told our souls of Peterkin:
    Our thoughts of _him_ were still the same
    Howe'er the shadows went and came,
    So, on we wandered, hand in hand,
    And all the world was fairy-land.

       *   *   *   *

    And as we went we seemed to hear
      Surging up from distant dells
    A solemn music, soft and clear
      As if a field of lily-bells
    Were tolling all together, sweet
      But sad and low and keeping time
    To multitudinous marching feet
    With a slow funereal beat
      And a deep harmonious chime
    That told us by its dark refrain
    The reason fairies suffered pain.


SONG

      Bear her along
      Keep ye your song
    Tender and sweet and low:
      Fairies must die!
      Ask ye not why
    Ye that have hurt her so.

    _Passing away--flower from the spray! Colour and light from the leaf!
    Soon, soon will the year shed its bloom on her bier, and the dust
        of its dreams on our grief._

      Men upon earth
      Bring us to birth
    Gently at even and morn!
      When as brother and brother
      They greet one another
    And smile--then a fairy is born!

      But at each cruel word
      Upon earth that is heard,
    Each deed of unkindness or hate,
      Some fairy must pass
      From the games in the grass
    And steal thro' the terrible Gate.

    _Passing away--flower from the spray! Colour and light from the leaf!
    Soon, soon will the year shed its bloom on her bier, and the
        dust of its dreams on our grief._

      If ye knew, if ye knew
      All the wrong that ye do
    By the thought that ye harbour alone,
      How the face of some fairy
      Grows wistful and weary
    And the heart in her cold as a stone!
      Ah, she was born
      Blithe as the morn
    Under an April sky,
      Born of the greeting
      Of two lovers meeting.
    They parted, and so she must die.

    _Passing away--flower from the spray! Colour and light from the leaf!
    Soon, soon will the year shed its bloom on her bier, and the dust of
        its dreams on our grief._

      Cradled in blisses,
      Yea, born of your kisses,
    Oh, ye lovers that met by the moon,
      She would not have cried
      In the darkness and died
    If ye had not forgotten so soon.

      Cruel mortals, they say,
      Live for ever and aye,
    And they pray in the dark on their knees.
      But the flowers that are fled
      And the loves that are dead,
    What heaven takes pity on these?

    _Bear her along--singing your song--tender and sweet and low!
    Fairies must die! Ask ye not why--ye that have hurt her so._

      Passing away--
      Flower from the spray!
    Colour and light from the leaf!
      Soon, soon will the year
      Shed its bloom on her bier
    And the dust of its dreams on our grief.

       *   *   *   *

    Then we came through a glittering crystal grot
      By a path like, a pale moonbeam,
    And a broad blue bridge of Forget-me-not
      Over a shimmering stream,
    To where, through the deep blue dusk, a gleam
      Rose like the soul of the setting sun;
    A sunset breaking through the earth,
      A crimson sea of the poppies of dream,
    Deep as the sleep that gave them birth
      In the night where all earthly dreams are done.

    And then, like a pearl-pale porch of the moon,
      Faint and sweet as a starlit shrine,
                Over the gloom
                Of the crimson bloom
      We saw the Gates of Ivory shine;
    And, lulled and lured by the lullaby tune
      Of the cradling airs that drowsily creep
    From blossom to blossom, and lazily croon
    Through the heart of the midnight's mystic noon,
      We came to the Gates of the City of Sleep.

    Faint and sweet as a lily's repose
      On the broad black breast of a midnight lake,
      The City delighted the cradling night:
    Like a straggling palace of cloud it rose;
      The towers were crowned with a crystal light
      Like the starry crown of a white snowflake
    As they pierced in a wild white pinnacled crowd,
    Through the dusky wreaths of enchanted cloud
      That swirled all round like a witch's hair.

    And we heard, as the sound of a great sea sighing,
      The sigh of the sleepless world of care;
    And we saw strange shadowy figures flying
    Up to the Ivory Gates and beating
      With pale hands, long and famished and thin;
    Like blinded birds we saw them dash
      Against the cruelly gleaming wall:
      We heard them wearily moan and call
    With sharp starved lips for ever entreating
      The pale doorkeeper to let them in.

    And still, as they beat, again and again,
      We saw on the moon-pale lintels a splash
    Of crimson blood like a poppy-stain
    Or a wild red rose from the gardens of pain
      That sigh all night like a ghostly sea
      From the City of Sleep to Gethsemane.

    And lo, as we neared the mighty crowd
    An old blind man came, crying aloud
    To greet us, as once the blind man cried
    In the Bible picture--you know we tried
    To paint that print, with its Eastern sun;
    But the reds and the yellows _would_ mix and run,
    And the blue of the sky made a horrible mess
    Right over the edge of the Lord's white dress.
    And the old blind man, just as though he had eyes,
    Came straight to meet us; and all the cries
    Of the crowd were hushed; and a strange sweet calm
    Stole through the air like a breath of the balm
    That was wafted abroad from the Forest of Thyme
    (For it rolled all round that curious clime
    With its magical clouds of perfumed trees.)
    And the blind man cried, "Our help is at hand,
    Oh, brothers, remember the old command,
    Remember the frankincense and myrrh,
    Make way, make way for those little ones there;
    Make way, make way, I have seen them afar
    Under a great white Eastern star;
    For I am the mad blind man who sees!"
    Then he whispered, softly--_Of such as these_;
    And through the hush of the cloven crowd
    We passed to the gates of the City, and there
    Our fairy heralds cried aloud--
    _Open your Gates; don't stand and stare;
    These are the Children for whom our King
    Made all the star-worlds dance in a ring!_

    And lo, like a sorrow that melts from the heart
    In tears, the slow gates melted apart;
    And into the City we passed like a dream;
    And then, in one splendid marching stream
    The whole of that host came following through.
    We were only children, just like you;
    Children, ah, but we felt so grand
    As we led them--although we could understand
    Nothing at all of the wonderful song
    That rose all round as we marched along.


SONG

    _You that have seen how the world and its glory
      Change and grow old like the love of a friend;
    You that have come to the end of the story,
      You that were tired ere you came to the end;
    You that are weary of laughter and sorrow,
      Pain and pleasure, labour and sin,
    Sick of the midnight and dreading the morrow,
      Ah, come in; come in._

    _You that are bearing the load of the ages;
      You that have loved overmuch and too late;
    You that confute all the saws of the sages;
      You that served only because you must wait,
    Knowing your work was a wasted endeavour;
      You that have lost and yet triumphed therein,
    Add loss to your losses and triumph for ever;
      Ah, come in; come in._

    And we knew as we went up that twisted street,
      With its violet shadows and pearl-pale walls,
    We were coming to Something strange and sweet,
      For the dim air echoed with elfin calls;
    And, far away, in the heart of the City,
      A murmur of laughter and revelry rose,--
    A sound that was faint as the smile of Pity,
      And sweet as a swan-song's golden close.

    And then, once more, as we marched along,
    There surged all round us that wonderful song;
    And it swung to the tramp of our marching feet
    But ah, it was tenderer now and so sweet
    That it made our eyes grow wet and blind,
    And the whole wide-world seem mother-kind,
    Folding us round with a gentle embrace,
    And pressing our souls to her soft sweet face.


SONG

    _Dreams; dreams; ah, the memory blinding us,
      Blinding our eyes to the way that we go;
    Till the new sorrow come, once more reminding us
      Blindly of kind hearts, ours long ago:
    Mother-mine, whisper we, yours was the love for me!
      Still, though our paths lie lone and apart,
    Yours is the true love, shining above for me,
      Yours are the kind eyes, hurting my heart._

    _Dreams; dreams; ah, how shall we sing of them,
      Dreams that we loved with our head on her breast:
    Dreams; dreams; and the cradle-sweet swing of them;
      Ay, for her voice was the sound we loved best:
    Can we remember at all or, forgetting it,
      Can we recall for a moment the gleam
    Of our childhood's delight and the wonder begetting it,
      Wonder awakened in dreams of a dream?_

    And once again, from the heart of the City
      A murmur of tenderer laughter rose,
    A sound that was faint as the smile of Pity,
      And sweet as a swan-song's golden close;
    And it seemed as if some wonderful Fair
      Were charming the night of the City of Dreams,
    For, over the mystical din out there,
      The clouds were litten with flickering gleams,
    And a roseate light like the day's first flush
      Quivered and beat on the towers above,
    And we heard through the curious crooning hush
      An elfin song that we used to love.
    _Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn ..._
      And the soft wind blew it the other way;
    So all that we heard was--_Cow's in the corn_;
      But we never heard anything half so gay!
    And ever we seemed to be drawing nearer
      That mystical roseate smoke-wreathed glare,
    And the curious music grew louder and clearer,
      Till mustard-seed said, "We are lucky, you see,
      We've arrived at a time of festivity!"
    And so to the end of the street we came,
      And turned a corner, and--there we were,
    In a place that glowed like the dawn of day,
      A crowded clamouring City square
    Like the cloudy heart of an opal, aflame
      With the lights of a great Dream-Fair:
    Thousands of children were gathered there,
      Thousands of old men, weary and grey,
    And the shouts of the showmen filled the air--
      This way! This way! This way!

    And _See-Saw_; _Margery Daw_; we heard a rollicking shout,
    As the swing-boats hurtled over our heads to the tune of the roundabout;
    And _Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn_, we heard the showmen cry,
    And _Dickory Dock, I'm as good as a clock_, we heard the swings reply.

    This way, this way to your Heart's Desire;
      Come, cast your burdens down;
    And the pauper shall mount his throne in the skies,
      And the king be rid of his crown:
    And souls that were dead shall be fed with fire
      From the fount of their ancient pain,
    And your lost love come with the light in her eyes
      Back to your heart again.

    Ah, here be sure she shall never prove
      Less kind than her eyes were bright;
    This way, this way to your old lost love,
      You shall kiss her lips to-night;
    This way for the smile of a dead man's face
      And the grip of a brother's hand,
    This way to your childhood's heart of grace
      And your home in Fairy-land.

    _Dickory Dock, I'm as good as a clock_, d'you hear my swivels chime?
    To and fro as I come and go, I keep eternal time.
    O, little Bo-peep, if you've lost your sheep and don't know where
        to find 'em,
    Leave 'em alone and they'll come home, and carry their tails behind 'em.

    And _See-Saw; Margery Daw_; there came the chorussing shout,
    As the swing-boats answered the roaring tune of the rollicking
        roundabout;
    Dickory, dickory, dickory, dock, d'you hear my swivels chime?
    Swing; swing; you're as good as a king if you keep eternal time.

    Then we saw that the tunes of the world were one;
    And the metre that guided the rhythmic sun
    Was at one, like the ebb and the flow of the sea,
    With the tunes that we learned at our mother's knee;
    The beat of the horse-hoofs that carried us down
    To see the fine Lady of Banbury Town;
    And so, by the rhymes that we knew, we could tell
    Without knowing the others--that all was well.

    And then, our brains began to spin;
    For it seemed as if that mighty din
    Were no less than the cries of the poets and sages
    Of all the nations in all the ages;
    And, if they could only beat out the whole
    Of their music together, the guerdon and goal
    Of the world would be reached with one mighty shout,
    And the dark dread secret of Time be out;
    And nearer, nearer they seemed to climb,
      And madder and merrier rose the song,
    And the swings and the see-saws marked the time;
      For this was the maddest and merriest throng
    That ever was met on a holy-day
    To dance the dust of the world away;
    And madder and merrier, round and round
    The whirligigs whirled to the whirling sound,
    Till it seemed that the mad song burst its bars
    And mixed with the song of the whirling stars,
    The song that the rhythmic Time-Tides tell
    To seraphs in Heaven and devils in Hell;
    Ay; Heaven and Hell in accordant chime
    With the universal rhythm and rhyme
    Were nearing the secret of Space and Time;
    The song of that ultimate mystery
    Which only the mad blind men who see,
    Led by the laugh of a little child,
    Can utter; ay, wilder and yet more wild
    It maddened, till now--full song--it was out!
    It roared from the starry roundabout--

    _A child was born in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem,
      A child was born in Bethlehem; ah, hear my fairy fable;
    For I have seen the King of Kings, no longer thronged with angel wings,
      But crooning like a little babe, and cradled in a stable._

    _The wise men came to greet him with their gifts of myrrh
        and frankincense,--
      Gold and myrrh and frankincense they brought to make him mirth;
    And would you know the way to win to little brother Peterkin,
      My childhood's heart shall guide you through the glories of
        the earth._

    _A child was born in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem;
      The wise men came to welcome him: a star stood o'er the gable;
    And there they saw the King of Kings, no longer thronged with
        angel wings,
      But crooning like a little babe, and cradled in a stable._

    And creeping through the music once again the fairy cry
      Came freezing o'er the snowy towers to lead us on to Peterkin:
    Once more the fairy bugles blew from lands beyond the sky,
    And we all groped out together, dazed and blind, we knew not why;
      Out through the City's farther gates we went to look for Peterkin;
    Out, out into the dark Unknown, and heard the clamour die
      Far, far away behind us as we trotted on to Peterkin.

    Then once more along the rare
      Forest-paths we groped our way:
    Here the glow-worm's league-long glare
      Turned the Wild Thyme night to day:
    There we passed a sort of whale
      Sixty feet in length or more,
    But we knew it was a snail
      Even when we heard it snore.

    Often through the glamorous gloom
      Almost on the top of us
    We beheld a beetle loom
      Like a hippopotamus;
    Once or twice a spotted toad
      Like a mountain wobbled by
    With a rolling moon that glowed
      Through the skin-fringe of its eye.

    Once a caterpillar bowed
      Down a leaf of Ygdrasil
    Like a sunset-coloured cloud
      Sleeping on a quiet hill:
    Once we came upon a moth
      Fast asleep with outspread wings,
    Like a mighty tissued cloth
      Woven for the feet of kings.

    There above the woods in state
      Many a temple dome that glows
    Delicately like a great
      Rainbow-coloured bubble rose:
    Though they were but flowers on earth,
      Oh, we dared not enter in;
    For in that divine re-birth
      Less than awe were more than sin.

    Yet their mystic anthems came
      Sweetly to our listening ears;
    And their burden was the same--
      "No more sorrow, no more tears!
    Whither Peterkin has gone
      You, assuredly, shall go:
    When your wanderings are done,
      All he knows you, too, shall know!"

    So we thought we'd onward roam
      Till earth's Smallest Flower appeared,
    With a less tremendous dome
      Less divinely to be feared:
    Then, perchance, if we should dare
      Timidly to enter in,
    Might some kindly doorkeeper
      Give us news of Peterkin.

    At last we saw a crimson porch
    Far away, like a dull red torch
    Burning in the purple gloom;
    And a great ocean of perfume
    Rolled round us as we drew anear,
    And then we strangely seemed to hear
    The shadow of a mighty psalm,
      A sound as if a golden sea
    Of music swung in utter calm
      Against the shores of Eternity;
    And then we saw the mighty dome
      Of some mysterious Temple tower
    On high; and knew that we had come,
      At last, to that sweet House of Grace
      Which wise men find in every place--
      The Temple of the Smallest Flower.

    And there--alas--our fairy friends
    Whispered, "Here our kingdom ends:
      You must enter in alone,
    But your souls will surely show
      Whither Peterkin is gone
    And the road that you must go:
      We, poor fairies, have no souls!
      Hark, the warning hare-bell tolls;"
    So "Good-bye, good-bye," they said,
    "Dear little seekers-for-the-dead."
    They vanished; ah, but as they went
    We heard their voices softly blent
    In some mysterious fairy song
    That seemed to make us wise and strong;

    For it was like the holy calm
    That fills the bosomed rose with balm,
    Or blessings that the twilight breathes
    Where the honeysuckle wreathes
    Between young lovers and the sky
    As on banks of flowers they lie;
    And with wings of rose and green
    Laughing fairies pass unseen,
    Singing their sweet lullaby,--
        Lulla-lulla-lullaby!
        Lulla-lulla-lullaby!
          Ah, good-night, with lullaby!

       *   *   *   *

    Only a flower? Those carven walls,
    Those cornices and coronals,
    The splendid crimson porch, the thin
    Strange sounds of singing from within--
    Through the scented arch we stept,
      Pushed back the soft petallic door,
    And down the velvet aisles we crept;
      Was it a Flower--no more?

    For one of the voices that we heard,
    A child's voice, clear as the voice of a bird,
    Was it not?--nay, it could not be!
    And a woman's voice that tenderly
    Answered him in fond refrain,
    And pierced our hearts with sweet sweet pain,
    As if dear Mary-mother hung
    Above some little child, and sung.
    Between the waves of that golden sea
    The cradle-songs of Eternity;
    And, while in her deep smile he basked,
    Answered whatsoe'er he asked.

    _What is there hid in the heart of a rose,
          Mother-mine?
    Ah, who knows, who knows, who knows?
    A man that died on a lonely hill
    May tell you, perhaps, but none other will,
          Little child._

    _What does it take to make a rose,
          Mother-mine?
    The God that died to make it knows
    It takes the world's eternal wars,
    It takes the moon and all the stars,
    It takes the might of heaven and hell
    And the everlasting Love as well,
          Little child._

    But there, in one great shrine apart
    Within the Temple's holiest heart,
    We came upon a blinding light,
      Suddenly, and a burning throne
    Of pinnacled glory, wild and white;
      We could not see Who reigned thereon;
    For, all at once, as a wood-bird sings,
    The aisles were full of great white wings
    Row above mystic burning row;
    And through the splendour and the glow
    We saw four angels, great and sweet,
    With outspread wings and folded feet,
    Come gliding down from a heaven within
      The golden heart of Paradise;
      And in their hands, with laughing eyes,
    Lay little brother Peterkin.

    And all around the Temple of the Smallest of the Flowers
      The glory of the angels made a star for little Peterkin;
    For all the Kings of Splendour and all the Heavenly Powers
    Were gathered there together in the fairy forest bowers
      With all their globed and radiant wings to make a star for Peterkin,
    The star that shone upon the East, a star that still is ours,
      Whene'er we hang our stockings up, a star of wings for Peterkin.

    Then all, in one great flash, was gone--
      A voice cried, "Hush, all's well!"
    And we stood dreaming there alone,
      In darkness. Who can tell
    The mystic quiet that we felt,
    As if the woods in worship knelt;
      Far off we heard a bell
    Tolling strange human folk to prayer
    Through fields of sunset-coloured air.

    And then a voice, "Why, here they are!"
      And--as it seemed--we woke;
    The sweet old skies, great star by star
      Upon our vision broke;
    Field over field of heavenly blue
    Rose o'er us; then a voice we knew
      Softly and gently spoke--
    "See, they are sleeping by the side
    Of that dear little one--who died."


PART V

THE HAPPY ENDING

    We told dear father all our tale
      That night before we went to bed,
    And at the end his face grew pale,
      And he bent over us and said
    (Was it not strange?) he, too, was there,
      A weary, weary watch to keep
      Before the gates of the City of Sleep;
    But, ere we came, he did not dare
      Even to dream of entering in,
      Or even to hope for Peterkin.
    He was the poor blind man, he said,
    And we--how low he bent his head!
    Then he called mother near; and low
    He whispered to us--"Prompt me now;
    For I forget that song we heard,
    But you remember every word."
    Then memory came like a breaking morn,
    And we breathed it to him--_A child was born!_
    And there he drew us to his breast
    And softly murmured all the rest.--

    _The wise men came to greet him with their gifts of myrrh
        and frankincense,--
      Gold and myrrh and frankincense they brought to make him mirth;
    And would you know the way to win to little brother Peterkin,
      My childhood's heart shall guide you through the glories of
        the earth._

    Then he looked up and mother knelt
      Beside us, oh, her eyes were bright;
    Her arms were like a lovely belt
      All round us as we said Good-night
    To father: _he_ was crying now,
    But they were happy tears, somehow;
    For there we saw dear mother lay
    Her cheek against his cheek and say--
    Hush, let me kiss those tears away.


_DEDICATION_

    _What can a wanderer bring
      To little ones loved like you?
    You have songs of your own to sing
      That are far more steadfast and true,
    Crumbs of pity for birds
      That flit o'er your sun-swept lawn,
    Songs that are dearer than all our words
      With a love that is clear as the dawn._

    _What should a dreamer devise,
      In the depths of his wayward will,
    To deepen the gleam of your eyes
      Who can dance with the Sun-child still?
    Yet you glanced on his lonely way,
      You cheered him in dream and deed,
    And his heart is o'erflowing, o'erflowing to-day
      With a love that--you never will need._

    _What can a pilgrim teach
      To dwellers in fairy-land?
    Truth that excels all speech
      You murmur and understand!
    All he can sing you he brings;
      But--one thing more if he may,
    One thing more that the King of Kings
      Will take from the child on the way._

    _Yet how can a child of the night
      Brighten the light of the sun?
    How can he add a delight
      To the dances that never are done?
    Ah, what if he struggles to turn
      Once more to the sweet old skies
    With praise and praise, from the fetters that burn,
      To the God that brightened your eyes?_

    _Yes; he is weak, he will fail,
      Yet, what if, in sorrows apart,
    One thing, one should avail,
      The cry of a grateful heart;
    It has wings: they return through the night
      To a sky where the light lives yet,
    To the clouds that kneel on his mountain-height
      And the path that his feet forget._

    _What if he struggles and still
      Fails and struggles again?
    What if his broken will
      Whispers the struggle is vain?
    Once at least he has risen
      Because he remembered your eyes;
    Once they have brought to his earthly prison
      The passion of Paradise._

    _Kind little eyes that I love,
      Eyes forgetful of mine,
    In a dream I am bending above
      Your sleep, and you open and shine;
    And I know as my own grow blind
      With a lonely prayer for your sake,
    He will hear--even me--little eyes that were kind,
      God bless you, asleep or awake._




FORTY SINGING SEAMEN AND OTHER POEMS

_TO GARNETT_




FORTY SINGING SEAMEN

"In our lands be Beeres and Lyons of dyvers colours as ye redd, grene,
black, and white. And in our land be also unicornes and these Unicornes
slee many Lyons.... Also there dare no man make a lye in our lande, for
if he dyde he sholde incontynent be sleyn."--_Mediæval Epistle, of Pope
Prester John._


    I

    Across the seas of Wonderland to Mogadore we plodded,
      Forty singing seamen in an old black barque,
    And we landed in the twilight where a Polyphemus nodded
      With his battered moon-eye winking red and yellow through the dark!
            For his eye was growing mellow,
            Rich and ripe and red and yellow,
      As was time, since old Ulysses made him bellow in the dark!
    _Cho._--Since Ulysses bunged his eye up with a pine-torch in the dark!


    II

    _Were_ they mountains in the gloaming or the giant's ugly shoulders
      Just beneath the rolling eyeball, with its bleared and vinous glow,
    Red and yellow o'er the purple of the pines among the boulders
      And the shaggy horror brooding on the sullen slopes below,
            _Were_ they pines among the boulders
            Or the hair upon his shoulders?
      We were only simple seamen, so of course we didn't know.
    _Cho._--We were simple singing seamen, so of course we couldn't know.


    III

    But we crossed a plain of poppies, and we came upon a fountain
      Not of water, but of jewels, like a spray of leaping fire;
    And behind it, in an emerald glade, beneath a golden mountain
      There stood a crystal palace, for a sailor to admire;
            For a troop of ghosts came round us,
            Which with leaves of bay they crowned us,
      Then with grog they well nigh drowned us, to the depth of our desire!
    _Cho._--And 'twas very friendly of them, as a sailor can admire!


    IV

    There was music all about us, we were growing quite forgetful
      We were only singing seamen from the dirt of London-town,
    Though the nectar that we swallowed seemed to vanish half regretful
      As if we wasn't good enough to take such vittles down,
            When we saw a sudden figure,
            Tall and black as any nigger,
      Like the devil--only bigger--drawing near us with a frown!
    _Cho._--Like the devil--but much bigger--and he wore a golden crown!


    V

    And "What's all this?" he growls at us! With dignity we chaunted,
      "Forty singing seamen, sir, as won't be put upon!"
    "What? Englishmen?" he cries, "Well, if ye don't mind being haunted,
      Faith you're welcome to my palace; I'm the famous Prester John!
            Will ye walk into my palace?
            I don't bear 'ee any malice!
      One and all ye shall be welcome in the halls of Prester John!"
    _Cho._--So we walked into the palace and the halls of Prester John!


    VI

    Now the door was one great diamond and the hall a hollow ruby--
      Big as Beachy Head, my lads, nay bigger by a half!
    And I sees the mate wi' mouth agape, a-staring like a booby,
      And the skipper close behind him, with his tongue out like a calf!
            Now the way to take it rightly
            Was to walk along politely
      Just as if you didn't notice--so I couldn't help but laugh!
    _Cho._--For they both forgot their manners and the crew was bound
        to laugh!


    VII

    But he took us through his palace and, my lads, as I'm a sinner,
      We walked into an opal like a sunset-coloured cloud--
    "My dining-room," he says, and, quick as light we saw a dinner
      Spread before us by the fingers of a hidden fairy crowd;
            And the skipper, swaying gently
            After dinner, murmurs faintly,
      "I looks to-wards you, Prester John, you've done us very proud!"
    _Cho._--And we drank his health with honours, for he _done_ us
        _very_ proud!


    VIII

    Then he walks us to his garden where we sees a feathered demon
      Very splendid and important on a sort of spicy tree!
    "That's the Phoenix," whispers Prester, "which all eddicated seamen
      Knows the only one existent, and _he's_ waiting for to flee!
            When his hundred years expire
            Then he'll set hisself a-fire
      And another from his ashes rise most beautiful to see!"
    _Cho._--With wings of rose and emerald most beautiful to see!


    IX

    Then he says, "In younder forest there's a little silver river,
      And whosoever drinks of it, his youth shall never die!
    The centuries go by, but Prester John endures for ever
      With his music in the mountains and his magic on the sky!
            While _your_ hearts are growing colder,
            While your world is growing older,
      There's a magic in the distance, where the sea-line meets the sky,"
    _Cho._--It shall call to singing seamen till the fount o' song is dry!


    X

    So we thought we'd up and seek it, but that forest fair defied us,--
      First a crimson leopard laughs at us most horrible to see,
    Then a sea-green lion came and sniffed and licked his chops and eyed us,
      While a red and yellow unicorn was dancing round a tree!
            _We_ was trying to look thinner,
            Which was hard, because our dinner
      Must ha' made us very tempting to a cat o' high degree!
    _Cho._--Must ha' made us very tempting to the whole menarjeree!


    XI

    So we scuttled from that forest and across the poppy meadows
      Where the awful shaggy horror brooded o'er us in the dark!
    And we pushes out from shore again a-jumping at our shadows,
      And pulls away most joyful to the old black barque!
            And home again we plodded
            While the Polyphemus nodded
      With his battered moon-eye winking red and yellow through the dark.
    _Cho._--Oh, the moon above the mountains, red and yellow through
        the dark!


    XII

    Across the seas of Wonderland to London-town we blundered,
      Forty singing seamen as was puzzled for to know
    If the visions that we saw was caused by--here again we pondered--
      A tipple in a vision forty thousand years ago.
            Could the grog we _dreamt_ we swallowed
            Make us _dream_ of all that followed?
      We were only simple seamen, so of course we didn't know!
    _Cho._--We were simple singing seamen, so of course we could not know!




THE EMPIRE BUILDERS


    Who are the Empire-builders? They
      Whose desperate arrogance demands
    A self-reflecting power to sway
      A hundred little selfless lands?
    Lord God of battles, ere we bow
      To these and to their soulless lust,
    Let fall Thy thunders on us now
      And strike us equal to the dust.

    Before the stars in heaven were made
      Our great Commander led us forth;
    And now the embattled lines are laid
      To East, to West, to South, to North;
    According as of old He planned
      We take our station in the field,
    Nor dare to dream we understand
      The splendour of the swords we wield.

    We know not what the Soul intends
      That lives and moves behind our deeds;
    We wheel and march to glorious ends
      Beyond the common soldier's needs:
    And some are raised to high rewards,
      And some by regiments are hurled
    To die upon the opposing swords
      And sleep--forgotten by the world.

    And not where navies churn the foam,
      Nor called to fields of fierce emprize,
    In many a country cottage-home
      The Empire-builder lives and dies:
    Or through the roaring streets he goes
      A lean and weary City slave,
    The conqueror of a thousand foes
      Who walks, unheeded, to his grave.

    Leaders unknown of hopes forlorn
      Go past us in the daily mart,
    With many a shadowy crown of thorn
      And many a kingly broken heart:
    Though England's banner overhead
      Ever the secret signal flew,
    We only see its Cross is red
      As children see the skies are blue.

    For all are Empire-builders here,
      Whose hearts are true to heaven and home
    And, year by slow revolving year,
      Fulfil the duties as they come;
    So simple seems the task, and yet
      Many for this are crucified;
    Ay, and their brother-men forget
      The simple wounds in palm and side.

    But he that to his home is true,
      Where'er the tides of power may flow,
    Has built a kingdom great and new
      Which Time nor Fate shall overthrow
    These are the Empire-builders, these
      Annex where none shall say them nay
    Beyond the world's uncharted seas
      Realms that can never pass away.




NELSON'S YEAR

(1905)


    I

              "Hasten the Kingdom, England!"
              This year, a hundred years ago,
    The world attended, breathless, on the gathering pomp of war,
      While England and her deathless dead, with all their mighty
        hearts aglow,
    Swept onward like the dawn of doom to triumph at Trafalgar;
            Then the world was hushed to wonder
            As the cannon's dying thunder
    Broke out again in muffled peals across the heaving sea,
            And home the Victor came at last,
            Home, home, with England's flag half-mast,
    That never dipped to foe before, on Nelson's Victory.


    II

            God gave this year to England;
              And what He gives He takes again;
    He gives us life, He gives us death: our victories have wings;
      He gives us love and in its heart He hides the whole world's heart
        of pain:
    We gain by loss: impartially the eternal balance swings!
            Ay; in the fire we cherish
            Our thoughts and dreams may perish;
    Yet shall it burn for England's sake triumphant as of old!
            What sacrifice could gain for her
            Our own shall still maintain for her,
    And hold the gates of Freedom wide that take no keys of gold.


    III

            God gave this year to England;
              Her eyes are far too bright for tears
    Of sorrow; by her silent dead she kneels, too proud for pride;
      Their blood, their love, have bought her right to claim the new
        imperial years
    In England's name for Freedom, in whose love her children died;
            In whose love, though hope may dwindle,
            Love and brotherhood shall kindle
    Between the striving nations as a choral song takes fire,
          Till new hope, new faith, new wonder
            Cleave the clouds of doubt asunder,
    And speed the union of mankind in one divine desire.


    IV

            Hasten the Kingdom, England;
              This year across the listening world
    There came a sound of mingled tears where victory and defeat
      Clasped hands; and Peace--among the dead--stood wistfully, with white
        wings furled,
    Knowing the strife was idle; for the night and morning meet,
            Yet there is no disunion
            In heaven's divine communion
    As through the gates of twilight the harmonious morning pours;
            Ah, God speed that grander morrow
            When the world's divinest sorrow
    Shall show how Love stands knocking at the world's unopened doors.


    V

            Hasten the Kingdom, England;
              Look up across the narrow seas,
    Across the great white nations to thy dark imperial throne
      Where now three hundred million souls attend on thine august decrees;
    Ah, bow thine head in humbleness, the Kingdom is thine own:
            Not for the pride or power
            God gave thee this in dower;
    But, now the West and East have met and wept their mortal loss,
            Now that their tears have spoken
            And the long dumb spell is broken,
    Is it nothing that thy banner bears the red eternal cross?


    VI

            Ay! Lift the flag of England;
              And lo, that Eastern cross is there,
    Veiled with a hundred meanings as our English eyes are veiled;
      Yet to the grander dawn we move oblivious of the sign we bear,
    Oblivious of the heights we climb until the last be scaled;
            Then with all the earth before us
            And the great cross floating o'er us
    We shall break the sword we forged of old, so weak we were and blind;
            While the inviolate heaven discloses
            England's Rose of all the roses
    Dawning wide and ever wider o'er the kingdom of mankind.


    VII

          Hasten the Kingdom, England;
            For then all nations shall be one;
    One as the ordered stars are one that sing upon their way,
      One with the rhythmic glories of the swinging sea and the rolling sun,
    One with the flow of life and death, the tides of night and day;
            One with all dreams of beauty,
            One with all laws of duty;
    One with the weak and helpless while the one sky burns above;
            Till eyes by tears made glorious
            Look up at last victorious,
    And lips that starved break open in one song of life and love.


    VIII

          Hasten the Kingdom, England;
            And when the Spring returns again
    Rekindle in our English hearts the universal Spring,
      That we may wait in faith upon the former and the latter rain,
    Till all waste places burgeon and the wildernesses sing;
            Pour the glory of thy pity
            Through the dark and troubled city;
    Pour the splendour of thy beauty over wood and meadow fair;
            May the God of battles guide thee
            And the Christ-child walk beside thee
    With a word of peace for England in the dawn of Nelson's Year.




IN TIME OF WAR


    I

    To-night o'er Bagshot heath the purple heather
      Rolls like dumb thunder to the splendid West;
    And mighty ragged clouds are massed together
      Above the scarred old common's broken breast;
    And there are hints of blood between the boulders,
      Red glints of fiercer blossom, bright and bold;
    And round the shaggy mounds and sullen shoulders
      The gorse repays the sun with savage gold.

    And now, as in the West the light grows holy,
      And all the hollows of the heath grow dim,
    Far off, a sulky rumble rolls up slowly
      Where guns at practice growl their evening hymn.

    And here and there in bare clean yellow spaces
      The print of horse-hoofs like an answering cry
    Strikes strangely on the sense from lonely places
      Where there is nought but empty heath and sky.

    The print of warlike hoofs, where now no figure
      Of horse or man along the sky's red rim
    Breaks on the low horizon's rough black rigour
      To make the gorgeous waste less wild and grim;

    Strangely the hoof-prints strike, a Crusoe's wonder,
      Framed with sharp furze amongst the footless fells,
    A menace and a mystery, rapt asunder,
      As if the whole wide world contained nought else,--

    Nought but the grand despair of desolation
      Between us and that wild, how far, how near,
    Where, clothed with thunder, nation grapples nation,
      And Slaughter grips the clay-cold hand of Fear.


    II

    And far above the purple heath the sunset stars awaken,
      And ghostly hosts of cloud across the West begin to stream,
    And all the low soft winds with muffled cannonades are shaken,
      And all the blood-red blossom draws aloof into a dream;
    A dream--no more--and round the dream the clouds are curled together;
      A dream of two great stormy hosts embattled in the sky;
    For there against the low red heavens each sombre ridge of heather
      Up-heaves a hedge of bayonets around a battle-cry;

    Melts in the distant battle-field or brings the dream so near it
      That, almost, as the rifted clouds around them swim and reel,
    A thousand grey-lipped faces flash--ah, hark, the heart can hear it--
      The sharp command that lifts as one the levelled lines of steel.

    And through the purple thunders there are silent shadows creeping
      With murderous gleams of light, and then--a mighty leaping roar
    Where foe and foe are met; and then--a long low sound of weeping
      As Death laughs out from sea to sea, another fight is o'er.

    Another fight--but ah, how much is over? Night descending
      Draws o'er the scene her ghastly moon-shot veil with piteous hands;
    But all around the bivouac-glare the shadowy pickets wending
      See sights, hear sounds that only war's own madness understands.

    No circle of the accursed dead where dreaming Dante wandered,
      No city of death's eternal dole could match this mortal world
    Where men, before the living soul and quivering flesh are sundered,
      Through all the bestial shapes of pain to one wide grave are hurled.

    But in the midst for those who dare beyond the fringe to enter
      Be sure one kingly figure lies with pale and blood-soiled face,
    And round his brows a ragged crown of thorns; and in the centre
      Of those pale folded hands and feet the sigil of his grace.

    See, how the pale limbs, marred and scarred in love's lost battle,
        languish;
      See how the splendid passion still smiles quietly from his eyes:
    Come, come and see a king indeed, who triumphs in his anguish,
      Who conquers here in utter loss beneath the eternal skies.

    For unto lips so deadly calm what answer shall be given?
      Oh pale, pale king so deadly still beneath the unshaken stars,
    Who shall deny thy kingdom here, though heaven and earth were riven,
      With the last roar of onset in the world's intestine wars?

    The laugh is Death's; he laughs as erst o'er hours that England
        cherished,
      "Count up, count up the stricken homes that wail the first-born son,
    Count by your starved and fatherless the tale of what hath perished;
      Then gather with your foes and ask if you--or I--have won."


    III

    The world rolls on; and love and peace are mated:
      Still on the breast of England, like a star,
    The blood-red lonely heath blows, consecrated,
      A brooding practice-ground for blood-red war.

    Yet is there nothing out of tune with Nature
      There, where the skylark showers his earliest song,
    Where sun and wind have moulded every feature,
      And one world-music bears each note along.

    There many a brown-winged kestrel swoops or hovers
      In poised and patient quest of his own prey;
    And there are fern-clad glens where happy lovers
      May kiss the murmuring summer noon away.

    There, as the primal earth was--all is glorious
      Perfect and wise and wonderful in view
    Of that great heaven through which we rise victorious
      O'er all that strife and change and death can do.

    No nation yet has risen o'er earth's first nature;
      Though love illumed each individual mind,
    Like some half-blind, half-formed primeval creature
      The State still crawled a thousand years behind.

    Still on the standards of the great World-Powers
      Lion and bear and eagle sullenly brood,
    Whether the slow folds flap o'er halcyon hours
      Or stream tempestuously o'er fields of blood.

    By war's red evolution we have risen
      Far, since fierce Erda chose her conquering few,
    And out of Death's red gates and Time's grey prison
      They burst, elect from battle, tried and true.

    But now Death mocks at youth and love and glory,
      Chivalry slinks behind his loaded mines,
    With meaner murderous lips War tells her story,
      And round her cunning brows no laurel shines.

    And here to us the eternal charge is given
      To rise and make our low world touch God's high:
    To hasten God's own kingdom, Man's own heaven,
      And teach Love's grander army how to die.

    No kingdom then, no long-continuing city
      Shall e'er again be stablished by the sword;
    No blood-bought throne defy the powers of pity,
      No despot's crown outweigh one helot's word.

    Imperial England, breathe thy marching orders:
      The great host waits; the end, the end is close,
    When earth shall know thy peace in all her borders,
      And all her deserts blossom with thy Rose.

    Princedoms and peoples rise and flash and perish
      As the dew passes from the flowering thorn;
    Yet the one Kingdom that our dreams still cherish
      Lives in a light that blinds the world's red morn.

    Hasten the Kingdom, England, the days darken;
      We would not have thee slacken watch or ward,
    Nor doff thine armour till the whole world hearken,
      Nor till Time bid thee lay aside the sword.

    Hasten the Kingdom; hamlet, heath, and city,
      We are all at war, one bleeding bulk of pain;
    Little we know; but one thing--by God's pity--
      We know, and know all else on earth is vain.

    We know not yet how much we dare, how little;
      We dare not dream of peace; yet, as at need,
    England, God help thee, let no jot or tittle
      Of Love's last law go past thee without heed.

    _Who saves his life shall lose it!_ The great ages
      Bear witness--Rome and Babylon and Tyre
    Cry from the dust-stopped lips of all their sages,--
      There is no hope if man can climb no higher.

    England, by God's grace set apart to ponder
      A little while from battle, ah, take heed,
    Keep watch, keep watch, beside thy sleeping thunder;
      Call down Christ's pity while those others bleed;

    Waken the God within thee, while the sorrow
      Of battle surges round a distant shore,
    While Time is thine, lest on some deadly morrow
      The moving finger write--_but thine no more_.

    Little we know--but though the advancing æons
      Win every painful step by blood and fire,
    Though tortured mouths must chant the world's great pæans,
      And martyred souls proclaim the world's desire;

    Though war be nature's engine of rejection,
      Soon, soon, across her universal verge
    The soul of man in sacred insurrection
      Shall into God's diviner light emerge.

    Hasten the Kingdom, England, queen and mother;
      Little we know of all Time's works and ways;
    Yet this, this, this is sure: we need none other
      Knowledge or wisdom, hope or aim or praise,

    But to keep this one stormy banner flying
      In this one faith that none shall e'er disprove,
    Then drive the embattled world before thee, crying,
      There is one Emperor, whose name is Love.




ODE FOR THE SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY OF SWINBURNE


    I

    He needs no crown of ours, whose golden heart
      Poured out its wealth so freely in pure praise
      Of others: him the imperishable bays
    Crown, and on Sunium's height he sits apart:
    He hears immortal greetings this great morn:
      Fain would we bring, we also, all we may,
        Some wayside flower of transitory bloom,
            Frail tribute, only born
      To greet the gladness of this April day
        Then waste on death's dark wind its faint perfume.


    II

    Here on this April day the whole sweet Spring
      Speaks thro' his music only, or seems to speak.
      And we that hear, with hearts uplift and weak,
    What can we more than claim him for our king?
    Here on this April day (and many a time
      Shall April come and find him singing still)
        He is one with the world's great heart beyond the years,
          One with the pulsing rhyme
      Of tides that work some heavenly rhythmic will
        And hold the secret of all human tears.


    III

    For he, the last of that immortal race
      Whose music, like a robe of living light
      Re-clothed each new-born age and made it bright
    As with the glory of Love's transfiguring face,
    Reddened earth's roses, kindled the deep blue
      Of England's radiant, ever-singing sea,
        Recalled the white Thalassian from the foam.
          Woke the dim stars anew
      And triumphed in the triumph of Liberty,
        We claim him; but he hath not here his home.


    IV

    Not here; round him to-day the clouds divide:
      We know what faces thro' that rose-flushed air
      Now bend above him: Shelley's face is there,
    And Hugo's, lit with more than kingly pride.
    Replenished there with splendour, the blind eyes
      Of Milton bend from heaven to meet his own,
        Sappho is there, crowned with those queenlier flowers
          Whose graft outgrew our skies,
      His gift: Shakespeare leans earthward from his throne
        With hands outstretched. He needs no crown of ours.




IN CLOAK OF GREY


    I

    Love's a pilgrim, cloaked in grey,
      And his feet are pierced and bleeding:
    Have ye seen him pass this way
      Sorrowfully pleading?
    Ye that weep the world away,
    Have ye seen King Love to-day?--


    II

    Yea, we saw him; but he came
      Poppy-crowned and white of limb!
    Song had touched his lips with flame,
      And his eyes were drowsed and dim;
    And we kissed the hours away
    Till night grew rosier than the day.--


    III

    Hath he left you?--Yea, he left us
      A little while ago,
    Of his laughter quite bereft us
      And his limbs of snow;
    We know not why he went away
    Who ruled our revels yesterday.--


    IV

    Because ye did not understand
      Love cometh from afar,
    A pilgrim out of Holy Land
      Guided by a star:
    Last night he came in cloak of grey,
    Begging. Ye knew him not: he went his way.




A RIDE FOR THE QUEEN


    Queen of queens, oh lady mine,
      You who say you love me,
    Here's a cup of crimson wine
      To the stars above me;
    Here's a cup of blood and gall
      For a soldier's quaffing!
    What's the prize to crown it all?
      Death? I'll take it laughing!
    I ride for the Queen to-night!

    Though I find no knightly fee
      Waiting on my lealty,
    High upon the gallows-tree
      Faithful to my fealty,
    What had I but love and youth,
      Hope and fame in season?
    She has proved that more than truth
      Glorifies her treason!

    Would that other do as much?
      Ah, but if in sorrow
    Some forgotten look or touch
      Pierce her heart to-morrow
    She might love me yet, I think;
      So her lie befriends me,
    Though I know there's darker drink
      Down the road she sends me.

    Ay, one more great chance is mine
      (Can I faint or falter?)
    She shall pour my blood like wine,
      Make my heart her altar,
    Burn it to the dust! For, there,
      What if o'er the embers
    She should stoop and--I should hear--
      "_Hush! Thy love remembers!_"

    One more chance for every word
      Whispered to betray me,
    While she buckled on my sword
      Smiling to allay me;
    One more chance; ah, let me not
      Mar her perfect pleasure;
    Love shall pay me, jot by jot,
      Measure for her measure.

    Faith shall think I never knew,
      I will be so fervent!
    Doubt shall dream I dreamed her true
      As her war-worn servant!
    Whoso flouts her spotless name
      (Love, I wear thy token!)
    He shall face one sword of flame
      Ere the lie be spoken!

    All the world's a-foam with may,
      (Fragrant as her bosom!)
    Could I find a sweeter way
      Through the year's young blossom,
    Where her warm red mouth on mine
      Woke my soul's desire?...
    Hey! The cup of crimson wine,
      Blood and gall and fire!

    Castle Doom or Gates of Death?
      (Smile again for pity!)
    "Boot and horse," my lady saith,
      "Spur against the City,
    Bear this message!" God and she
      Still forget the guerdon;
    Nay, the rope is on the tree!
      That shall bear the burden!
    I ride for the Queen to-night!




SONG


    I

    When that I loved a maiden
      My heaven was in her eyes,
    And when they bent above me
      I knew no deeper skies;
    But when her heart forsook me
      My spirit broke its bars,
    For grief beyond the sunset
      And love beyond the stars.


    II

    When that I loved a maiden
      She seemed the world to me:
    Now is my soul the universe,
      My dreams the sky and sea:
    There is no heaven above me,
      No glory binds or bars
    My grief beyond the sunset,
      My love beyond the stars.


    III

    When that I loved a maiden
      I worshipped where she trod;
    But, when she clove my heart, the cleft
      Set free the imprisoned god:
    Then was I king of all the world,
      My soul had burst its bars,
    For grief beyond the sunset
      And love beyond the stars.




THE HIGHWAYMAN




PART ONE


    I

    The wind was a torrent of darkness among the gusty trees,
    The moon was a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas,
    The road was a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor,
    And the highwayman came riding--
                Riding--riding--
    The highwayman came riding, up to the old inn-door.


    II

    He'd a French cocked-hat on his forehead, a bunch of lace at his chin,
    A coat of the claret velvet, and breeches of brown doe-skin;
    They fitted with never a wrinkle: his boots were up to the thigh!
    And he rode with a jewelled twinkle,
                His pistol butts a-twinkle,
    His rapier hilt a-twinkle, under the jewelled sky.


    III

    Over the cobbles he clattered and clashed in the dark inn-yard,
    And he tapped with his whip on the shutters, but all was locked
        and barred;
    He whistled a tune to the window, and who should be waiting there
    But the landlord's black-eyed daughter,
                Bess, the landlord's daughter,
    Plaiting a dark red love-knot into her long black hair.


    IV

    And dark in the dark old inn-yard a stable-wicket creaked
    Where Tim the ostler listened; his face was white and peaked;
    His eyes were hollows of madness, his hair like mouldy hay,
    But he loved the landlord's daughter,
                The landlord's red-lipped daughter,
    Dumb as a dog he listened, and he heard the robber say--


    V

    "One kiss, my bonny sweetheart, I'm after a prize to-night,
    But I shall be back with the yellow gold before the morning light;
    Yet, if they press me sharply, and harry me through the day,
    Then look for me by moonlight,
                Watch for me by moonlight,
    I'll come to thee by moonlight, though hell should bar the way."


    VI

    He rose upright in the stirrups; he scarce could reach her hand,
    But she loosened her hair i' the casement! His face burnt like a brand
    As the black cascade of perfume came tumbling over his breast;
    And he kissed its waves in the moonlight,
                (Oh, sweet black waves in the moonlight!)
    Then he tugged at his rein in the moonlight, and galloped away
        to the West.


PART TWO


    I

    He did not come in the dawning; he did not come at noon;
    And out o' the tawny sunset, before the rise o' the moon,
    When the road was a gipsy's ribbon, looping the purple moor,
    A red-coat troop came marching--
                Marching--marching--
    King George's men came marching, up to the old inn-door.


    II

    They said no word to the landlord, they drank his ale instead,
    But they gagged his daughter and bound her to the foot of her
        narrow bed;
    Two of them knelt at her casement, with muskets at their side!
    There was death at every window;
                And hell at one dark window;
    For Bess could see, through her casement, the road that _he_
        would ride.


    III

    They had tied her up to attention, with many a sniggering jest;
    They had bound a musket beside her, with the barrel beneath her breast!
    "Now keep good watch!" and they kissed her.
                She heard the dead man say--
    _Look for me by moonlight;
                Watch for me by moonlight;
    I'll come to thee by moonlight, though hell should bar the way!_


    IV

    She twisted her hands behind her; but all the knots held good!
    She writhed her hands till her fingers were wet with sweat or blood!
    They stretched and strained in the darkness, and the hours
        crawled by like years,
    Till, now, on the stroke of midnight,
                Cold, on the stroke of midnight,
    The tip of one finger touched it! The trigger at least was hers!


    V

    The tip of one finger touched it; she strove no more for the rest!
    Up, she stood up to attention, with the barrel beneath her breast,
    She would not risk their hearing; she would not strive again;
    For the road lay bare in the moonlight;
                Blank and bare in the moonlight;
    And the blood of her veins in the moonlight throbbed to her
        love's refrain.


    VI

    _Tlot-tlot; tlot-tlot!_ Had they heard it? The horse-hoofs ringing
        clear;
    _Tlot-tlot, tlot-tlot_, in the distance? Were they deaf that they did
        not hear?
    Down the ribbon of moonlight, over the brow of the hill,
    The highwayman came riding,
                Riding, riding!
    The red-coats looked to their priming! She stood up, straight and
        still!


    VII

    _Tlot-tlot_, in the frosty silence! _Tlot-tlot_, in the echoing night!
    Nearer he came and nearer! Her face was like a light!
    Her eyes grew wide for a moment; she drew one last deep breath,
    Then her finger moved in the moonlight,
                Her musket shattered the moonlight,
    Shattered her breast in the moonlight and warned him--with her death.


    VIII

    He turned; he spurred to the West; he did not know who stood
    Bowed, with her head o'er the musket, drenched with her own red blood!
    Not till the dawn he heard it, his face grew grey to hear
    How Bess, the landlord's daughter,
                The landlord's black-eyed daughter,
    Had watched for her love in the moonlight, and died in the darkness
        there.


    IX

    Back, he spurred like a madman, shrieking a curse to the sky,
    With the white road smoking behind him and his rapier brandished high!
    Blood-red were his spurs i' the golden noon; wine-red was his velvet
        coat,
    When they shot him down on the highway,
                Down like a dog on the highway,
    And he lay in his blood on the highway, with the bunch of lace at his
        throat.

       *   *   *   *


    X

    _And still of a winter's night, they say, when the wind is in the trees,
    When the moon is a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas,
    When the road is a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor,
    A highwayman comes riding--
                Riding--riding--
    A highwayman comes riding, up to the old inn-door._


    XI

    _Over the cobbles he clatters and clangs in the dark inn-yard;
    He taps with his whip on the shutters, but all is locked and barred;
    He whistles a tune to the window, and who should be waiting there
    But the landlord's black-eyed daughter,
                Bess, the landlord's daughter,
    Plaiting a dark red love-knot into her long black hair._




THE HAUNTED PALACE


    Come to the haunted palace of my dreams,
      My crumbling palace by the eternal sea,
    Which, like a childless mother, still must croon
    Her ancient sorrows to the cold white moon,
            Or, ebbing tremulously,
    With one pale arm, where the long foam-fringe gleams,
      Will gather her rustling garments, for a space
      Of muffled weeping, round her dim white face.

    A princess dwelt here once: long, long ago
      This tower rose in the sunset like a prayer;
    And, through the witchery of that casement, rolled
    In one soft cataract of faëry gold
            Her wonder-woven hair;
    Her face leaned out and took the sacred glow
      Of evening, like the star that listened, high
      Above the gold clouds of the western sky.

    Was there no prince behind her in the gloom,
      No crimson shadow of his rich array?
    Her face leaned down to me: I saw the tears
    Bleed through her eyes with the slow pain of years,
            And her mouth yearned to say--
    "Friend, is there any message, from the tomb
      Where love lies buried?" But she only said--
      "Oh, friend, canst thou not save me from my dead?

    "Canst thou not minister to a soul in pain?
      Or hast thou then no comfortable word?
    Is there no faith in thee wherewith to atone
    For his unfaith who left me here alone,
            Heart-sick with hope deferred;
    Oh, since my love will never come again,
      Bring'st thou no respite through the desolate years,
    Respite from these most unavailing tears?"

    Then saw I, and mine own tears made response,
      Her woman's heart come breaking through her eyes;
    And, as I stood beneath the tower's grey wall,
    She let the soft waves of her deep hair fall
            Like flowers from Paradise
    Over my fevered face: then all at once
      Pity was passion; and like a sea of bliss
      Those waves rolled o'er me drowning for her kiss.

       *   *   *   *

    Seven years we dwelt together in that tower,
      Seven years in that old palace by the sea,
    And sitting at that casement, side by side,
    She told me all her pain: how love had died
            Now for all else but me;
    Yet how she had loved that other: like a flower
      Her red lips parted and with low sweet moan
      She pressed their tender suffering on mine own.

    And always with vague eyes she gazed afar,
      Out through the casement o'er the changing tide;
    And slowly was my heart's hope brought to nought
    That some day I should win each wandering thought
            And make her my soul's bride:
    Still, still she gazed across the cold sea-bar;
      Ay; with her hand in mine, still, still and pale,
      Waited and watched for the unreturning sail.

    And I, too, watched and waited as the years
      Rolled on; and slowly was I brought to feel
    How on my lips she met her lover's kiss,
    How my heart's pulse begat an alien bliss;
            And cold and hard as steel
    For me those eyes were, though their tender tears
      Were salt upon my cheek; and then one night
      I saw a sail come through the pale moonlight.

    And like an alien ghost I stole away,
      And like a breathing lover he returned;
    And in the woods I dwelt, or sometimes crept
    Out in the grey dawn while the lovers slept
            And the great sea-tides yearned
    Against the iron shores; and faint and grey
      The tower and the shut casement rose above:
      And on the earth I sobbed out all my love.

    At last, one royal rose-hung night in June,
      When the warm air like purple Hippocrene
    Brimmed the dim valley and sparkled into stars,
    I saw them cross the foam-lit sandy bars
            And dark pools, glimmering green,
    To bathe beneath the honey-coloured moon:
      I saw them swim out from that summer shore,
      Kissed by the sea, but they returned no more.

       *   *   *   *

    And into the dark palace, like a dream
      Remembered after long oblivious years,
    Through the strange open doors I crept and saw
    As some poor pagan might, with reverent awe,
            And deep adoring tears,
    The moonlight through that painted window stream
      Over the soft wave of their vacant bed;
      There sank I on my knees and bowed my head,

    For as a father by a cradle bows,
      Remembering two dead children of his own,
    I knelt; and by the cry of the great deep
    Their love seemed like a murmuring in their sleep,
            A little fevered moan,
    A little tossing of childish arms that shows
      How dreams go by! "If I were God," I wept,
      "I would have pity on children while they slept."

       *   *   *   *

    The days, the months, the years drift over me;
      This is my habitation till I die:
    Nothing is changed; they left that open book
    Beside the window. Did he sit and look
            Up at her face as I
    Looked while she read it, and the enchanted sea
      With rich eternities of love unknown
      Fulfilled the low sweet music of her tone?

    So did he listen, looking in her face?
      And did she ever pause, remembering so
      The heart that bore the whole weight of her pain
    Until her own heart's love returned again?
            In the still evening glow
    I sit and listen in this quiet place,
      And only hear--like notes of phantom birds--
      Their perished kisses and little broken words.

    _Come to the haunted palace of my dreams,
      My crumbling palace by the eternal sea,
    Which, like a childless mother, still must croon
    Her ancient sorrows to the cold white moon,
            Or, ebbing tremulously,
    With one pale arm, where the long foam-fringe gleams,
      Will gather her rustling garments, for a space
      Of muffled weeping, round her dim white face._




THE SCULPTOR


    This is my statue: cold and white
    It stands and takes the morning light!
      The world may flout my hopes and fears,
      Yet was my life's work washed with tears
    Of blood when this poor hand last night
      Finished the pain of years.

    Speak for me, patient lips of stone,
    Blind eyes my lips have rested on
      So often when the o'er-weary brain
      Would grope to human love again,
    And found this grave cold mask alone
      And the tears fell like rain.

    Ay; is this all? Is this the brow
    I fondled, never wondering how
      It lived--the face of pain and bliss
      That through the marble met my kiss?
    Oh, though the whole world praise it now,
      Let no man dream it is!

    They blame; they cannot blame aright
    Who never knew what infinite
      Deep loss must shame me most of all!
      They praise; like earth their praises fall
    Into a tomb. The hour of light
      Is flown beyond recall.

    Yet have I seen, yet have I known,
    And oh, not tombed in cold white stone
    The dream I lose on earth below;
    And I shall come with face aglow
    And find and claim it for my own
    Before God's throne, I know.




SUMMER

(AN ODE)


    Now like a pageant of the Golden Year
      In rich memorial pomp the hours go by,
    With rose-embroidered flags unfurled
    And tasselled bugles calling through the world
        Wake, for your hope draws near!
    Wake, for in each soft porch of azure sky,
      Seen through each arch of pale green leaves, the Gate
      Of Eden swings apart for Summer's royal state.

    Ah, when the Spirit of the moving scene
      Has entered in, the splendour will be spent!
    The flutes will cease, the gates will close;
    Only the scattered crimson of the rose,
        The wild wood's hapless queen,
    Dis-kingdomed, will declare the way he went;
      And, in a little while, her court will go,
      Pass like a cloud and leave no trace on earth below.

    Tell us no more of Autumn, the slow gold
      Of fruitage ripening in a world's decay,
    The falling leaves, the moist rich breath
    Of woods that swoon and crumble into death
        Over the gorgeous mould:
      Give us the flash and scent of keen-edged May
      Where wastes that bear no harvest yield their bloom,
      Rude crofts of flowering nettle, bents of yellow broom.

    The very reeds and sedges of the fen
      Open their hearts and blossom to the sky;
    The wild thyme on the mountain's knees
    Unrolls its purple market to the bees;
        Unharvested of men
    The Traveller's Joy can only smile and die.
      Joy, joy alone the throbbing whitethroats bring,
      Joy to themselves and heaven! They were but born to sing!

    And see, between the northern-scented pines,
      The whole sweet summer sharpens to a glow!
    See, as the well-spring plashes cool
    Over a shadowy green fern-fretted pool
        The mystic sunbeam shines
    For one mad moment on a breast of snow
      A warm white shoulder and a glowing arm
      Up-flung, where some swift Undine sinks in shy alarm.

    And if she were not all a dream, and lent
      Life for a little to your own desire,
    Oh, lover in the hawthorn lane,
    Dream not you hold her, or you dream in vain!
        The violet, spray-besprent
    When from that plunge the rainbows flashed like fire,
      Will scarce more swiftly lose its happy dew
      Than eyes which Undine haunts will cease to shine on you.

    What though the throstle pour his heart away,
      A happy spendthrift of uncounted gold,
    Swinging upon a blossomed briar
    With soft throat lifted in a wild desire
        To make the world his may.
    Ever the pageant through the gates is rolled
      Further away; in vain the rich notes throng
      Flooding the mellow noon with wave on wave of song.

    The feathery meadows like a lilac sea,
      Knee-deep, with honeyed clover, red and white,
    Roll billowing: the crisp clouds pass
    Trailing their soft blue shadows o'er the grass;
        The skylark, mad with glee,
    Quivers, up, up, to lose himself in light;
      And, through the forest, like a fairy dream
      Through some dark mind, the ferns in branching beauty stream.

    Enough of joy! A little respite lend,
      Summer, fair god that hast so little heed
    Of these that serve thee but to die,
    Mere trappings of thy tragic pageantry!
        Show us the end, the end!
    We too, with human hearts that break and bleed,
      March to the night that rounds their fleeting hour,
      And feel we, too, perchance but serve some loftier Power.

    O that our hearts might pass away with thee,
      Burning and pierced and full of thy sweet pain,
    Burst through the gates with thy swift soul,
    Hunt thy most white perfection to the goal,
        Nor wait, once more to see
    Thy chaliced lilies rotting in the rain,
      Thy ragged yellowing banners idly hung
      In woods that have forgotten all the songs we sung!

    _Peace! Like a pageant of the Golden Year
      In rich memorial pomp the hours go by,
    With rose-embroidered flags unfurled
    And tasselled bugles calling through the world
        Wake, for your hope draws near!
    Wake, for in each soft porch of azure sky,
      Seen through each arch of pale green leaves, the Gate
      Of Eden swings apart for Summer's royal state._

    Not wait! Forgive, forgive that feeble cry
      Of blinded passion all unworthy thee!
    For here the spirit of man may claim
    A loftier vision and a nobler aim
        Than e'er was born to die:
    Man only, of earth, throned on Eternity,
      From his own sure abiding-place can mark
      How earth's great golden dreams go past into the dark.




AT DAWN


    O Hesper-Phosphor, far away
        Shining, the first, the last white star,
    Hear'st thou the strange, the ghostly cry,
    That moan of an ancient agony
    From purple forest to golden sky
        Shivering over the breathless bay?
    It is not the wind that wakes with the day;
        For see, the gulls that wheel and call,
        Beyond the tumbling white-topped bar,
    Catching the sun-dawn on their wings,
        Like snow-flakes or like rose-leaves fall,
    Flutter and fall in airy rings;
        And drift, like lilies ruffling into blossom
        Upon some golden lake's unwrinkled bosom.

    Are not the forest's deep-lashed fringes wet
    With tears? Is not the voice of all regret
        Breaking out of the dark earth's heart?
    She too, she too, has loved and lost; and we--
    We that remember our lost Aready,
    Have we not known, we too,
    The primal greenwood's arch of blue,
    The radiant clouds at sun-rise curled
    Around the brows of the golden world;
    The marble temples, washed with dew,
    To which with rosy limbs aflame
    The violet-eyed Thalassian came,
    Came, pitiless, only to display
    How soon the youthful splendour dies away;
        Came, only to depart
    Laughing across the grey-grown bitter sea;
    For each man's life is earth's epitome,
    And though the years bring more than aught they take,
    Yet might his heart and hers well break
    Remembering how one prayer must still be vain.
        How one fair hope is dead,
        One passion quenched, one glory fled
    With those first loves that never come again.

    How many years, how many generations,
        Have heard that sigh in the dawn,
    When the dark earth yearns to the unforgotten nations
        And the old loves withdrawn,
    Old loves, old lovers, wonderful and unnumbered
        As waves on the wine-dark sea,
    'Neath the tall white towers of Troy and the temples that slumbered
        In Thessaly?

    From the beautiful palaces, from the miraculous portals,
        The swift white feet are flown!
    They were taintless of dust, the proud, the peerless Immortals
        As they sped to their loftier throne!
    Perchance they are there, earth dreams, on the shores of Hesper,
        Her rosy-bosomed Hours,
    Listening the wild fresh forest's enchanted whisper,
        Crowned with its new strange flowers;
    Listening the great new ocean's triumphant thunder
        On the stainless unknown shore,
    While that perilous queen of the world's delight and wonder
        Comes white from the foam once more.

    When the mists divide with the dawn o'er those glittering waters,
        Do they gaze over unoared seas--
    Naiad and nymph and the woodland's rose-crowned daughters
        And the Oceanides?
    Do they sing together, perchance, in that diamond splendour,
        That world of dawn and dew,
    With eyelids twitching to tears and with eyes grown tender
        The sweet old songs they knew,
    The songs of Greece? Ah, with harp-strings mute do they falter
        As the earth like a small star pales?
    When the heroes launch their ship by the smoking altar
        Does a memory lure their sails?
    Far, far away, do their hearts resume the story
      That never on earth was told,
    When all those urgent oars on the waste of glory
      Cast up its gold?

    _Are not the forest fringes wet
    With tears? Is not the voice of all regret
    Breaking out of the dark earth's heart?
    She too, she too, has loved and lost; and though
    She turned last night in disdain
        Away from the sunset-embers,
    From her soul she can never depart;
    She can never depart from her pain.
    Vainly she strives to forget;
    Beautiful in her woe,
        She awakes in the dawn and remembers._




THE SWIMMER'S RACE


    I

    Between the clover and the trembling sea
      They stand upon the golden-shadowed shore
    In naked boyish beauty, a strenuous three,
      Hearing the breakers' deep Olympic roar;
    Three young athletes poised on a forward limb,
      Mirrored like marble in the smooth wet sand,
        Three statues moulded by Praxiteles:
          The blue horizon rim
      Recedes, recedes upon a lovelier land,
        And England melts into the skies of Greece.


    II

    The dome of heaven is like one drop of dew,
      Quivering and clear and cloudless but for one
    Crisp bouldered Alpine range that blinds the blue
      With snowy gorges glittering to the sun:
    Forward the runners lean, with outstretched hand
      Waiting the word--ah, how the light relieves
        The silken rippling muscles as they start
          Spurning the yellow sand,
      Then skimming lightlier till the goal receives
        The winner, head thrown back and lips apart.


    III

    Now at the sea-marge on the sand they lie
      At rest for a moment, panting as they breathe,
    And gazing upward at the unbounded sky
      While the sand nestles round them from beneath;
    And in their hands they gather up the gold
      And through their fingers let it lazily stream
        Over them, dusking all their limbs' fair white,
            Blotting their shape and mould,
      Till, mixed into the distant gazer's dream
        Of earth and heaven, they seem to sink from sight.


    IV

    But one, in seeming petulance, oppressed
      With heat has cast his brown young body free:
    With arms behind his head and heaving breast
      He lies and gazes at the cool bright sea;
    So young Leander might when in the noon
      He panted for the starry eyes of eve
        And whispered o'er the waste of wandering waves,
            "Hero, bid night come soon!"
      Nor knew the nymphs were waiting to receive
        And kiss his pale limbs in their cold sea-caves.


    V

    Now to their feet they leap and, with a shout,
      Plunge through the glittering breakers without fear,
    Breast the green-arching billows, and still out,
      As if each dreamed the arms of Hero near;
    Now like three sunbeams on an emerald crest,
      Now like three foam-flakes melting out of sight,
        They are blent with all the glory of all the sea;
            One with the golden West;
      Merged in a myriad waves of mystic light
        As life is lost in immortality.




THE VENUS OF MILO


    I

    Backward she leans, as when the rose unblown
      Slides white from its warm sheath some morn in May!
    Under the sloping waist, aslant, her zone
      Clings as it slips in tender disarray;
    One knee, out-thrust a little, keeps it so
      Lingering ere it fall; her lovely face
          Gazes as o'er her own Eternity!
    Those armless radiant shoulders, long ago
      Perchance held arms out wide with yearning grace
        For Adon by the blue Sicilian sea.


    II

    No; thou eternal fount of these poor gleams,
      Bright axle-star of the wheeling temporal skies,
    Daughter of blood and foam and deathless dreams,
      Mother of flying Love that never dies,
    To thee, the topmost and consummate flower,
      The last harmonic height, our dull desires
        And our tired souls in dreary discord climb;
    The flesh forgets its pale and wandering fires;
      We gaze through heaven as from an ivory tower
        Shining upon the last dark shores of Time.


    III

    White culmination of the dreams of earth,
      Thy splendour beacons to a loftier goal,
    Where, slipping earthward from the great new birth,
      The shadowy senses leave the essential soul!
    Oh, naked loveliness, not yet revealed,
      A moment hence that falling robe will show
        No prophecy like this, this great new dawn,
    The bare bright breasts, each like a soft white shield,
      And the firm body like a slope of snow
        Out of the slipping dream-stuff half withdrawn.




THE NET OF VULCAN


    From peaks that clove the heavens asunder
      The hunchback god with sooty claws
    Loomed o'er the night, a cloud of thunder,
      And hurled the net of mortal laws;
    It flew, and all the world grew dimmer;
      Its blackness blotted out the stars,
    Then fell across the rosy glimmer
      That told where Venus couched with Mars.

    And, when the steeds that draw the morning
      Spurned from their Orient hooves the spray,
    All vainly soared the lavrock, warning
      Those tangled lovers of the day:
    Still with those twin white waves in blossom,
      Against the warrior's rock-broad breast,
    The netted light of the foam-born bosom
      Breathed like a sea at rest.

    And light was all that followed after,
      Light the derision of the sky,
    Light the divine Olympian laughter
      Of kindlier gods in days gone by:
    Low to her lover whispered Venus,
      "The shameless net be praised for this--
    When night herself no more could screen us
      It snared us one more hour of bliss."




NIOBE


    How like the sky she bends above her child,
      One with the great horizon of her pain!
    No sob from our low seas where woe runs wild,
      No weeping cloud, no momentary rain,
    Can mar the heaven-high visage of her grief,
      That frozen anguish, proud, majestic, dumb.
        She stoops in pity above the labouring earth,
            Knowing how fond, how brief
    Is all its hope, past, present, and to come,
      She stoops in pity, and yearns to assuage its dearth.

    Through that fair face the whole dark universe
      Speaks, as a thorn-tree speaks thro' one white flower;
    And all those wrenched Promethean souls that curse
      The gods, but cannot die before their hour,
    Find utterance in her beauty. That fair head
      Bows over all earth's graves. It was her cry
        Men heard in Rama when the twisted ways
            With children's blood ran red!
      Her silence utters all the sea would sigh;
          And, in her face, the whole earth's anguish prays.

    It is the pity, the pity of human love
      That strains her face, upturned to meet the doom,
    And her deep bosom, like a snow-white dove
      Frozen upon its nest, ne'er to resume
    Its happy breathing o'er the golden brace
      Whose fostering was her death. Death, death alone
        Can break the anguished horror of that spell!
            The sorrow on her face
      Is sealed: the living flesh is turned to stone;
        She knows all, all, that Life and Time can tell.

    Ah, yet, her woman's love, so vast, so tender;
      Her woman's body, hurt by every dart;
    Braving the thunder, still, still hide the slender
      Soft frightened child beneath her mighty heart.
    She is all one mute immortal cry, one brief
      Infinite pang of such victorious pain
        That she transcends the heavens and bows them down!
            The majesty of grief
      Is hers, and her dominion must remain
        Eternal. God nor man usurps that crown.




ORPHEUS AND EURYDICE


    I

    Height over height, the purple pine-woods clung to the rich Arcadian
        mountains,
      Holy-sweet as a sea of incense, under the low dark crimson skies:
    Glad were the glens where Eurydice bathed, in the beauty of dawn, at the
        haunted fountains
      Deep in the blue hyacinthine hollows, whence all the rivers of
          Arcady rise.

    Long ago, ah, white as the Huntress, cold and sweet as the petals that
        crowned her,
      Fair and fleet as the fawn that shakes the dew from the fern at
          break of day,
    Wreathed with the clouds of her dusky hair that swept in a sun-bright
        glory around her,
      Down to the valley her light feet stole, ah, soft as the budding of
          flowers in May.

    Down to the valley she came, for far and far below in the
        dreaming meadows
      Pleaded ever the Voice of voices, calling his love by her
        golden name;
    So she arose from her home in the hills, and down through the blossoms
        that danced with their shadows,
      Out of the blue of the dreaming distance, down to the heart of her
        lover she came.

       *   *   *   *

    Red were the lips that hovered above her lips in the flowery haze of the
        June-day:
      Red as a rose through the perfumed mist of passion that reeled before
          her eyes;
    Strong the smooth young sunburnt arms that folded her heart to his heart
        in the noon-day,
      Strong and supple with throbbing sunshine under the blinding
          southern skies.

    Ah, the kisses, the little murmurs, mad with pain for their
        phantom fleetness,
      Mad with pain for the passing of love that lives, they
          dreamed--as we dream--for an hour!
    Ah, the sudden tempest of passion, mad with pain, for its
        over-sweetness,
      As petal by petal and pang by pang their love broke out into
          perfect flower.

    Ah, the wonder as once he wakened, out of a dream of remembered blisses,
      Couched in the meadows of dreaming blossom to feel, like the touch of
          a flower on his eyes,
    Cool and fresh with the fragment dews of dawn the touch of her light
        swift kisses,
      Shed from the shadowy rose of her face between his face and the warm
          blue skies.


    II

    Lost in his new desire
    He dreamed away the hours;
          His lyre
    Lay buried in the flowers:

    To whom the King of Heaven,
    Apollo, lord of light,
          Had given
    Beauty and love and might:

    Might, if he would, to slay
    All evil dreams and pierce
          The grey
    Veil of the Universe;

    With Love that holds in one
    Sacred and ancient bond
          The sun
    And all the vast beyond,

    And Beauty to enthrall
    The soul of man to heaven:
          Yea, all
    These gifts to him were given.

    _Yet in his dream's desire
    He drowsed away the hours:
          His lyre
    Lay buried in the flowers._

    Then in his wrath arose
    Apollo, lord of light,
          That shows
    The wrong deed from the right;

    And by what radiant laws
    O'erruling human needs,
          The cause
    To consequence proceeds;

    How balanced is the sway
    He gives each mortal doom:
          How day
    Demands the atoning gloom:

    How all good things await
    The soul that pays the price
          To Fate
    By equal sacrifice;

    And how on him that sleeps
    For less than labour's sake
          There creeps
    Uncharmed, the Pythian snake.


    III

    Lulled by the wash of the feathery grasses, a sea with many a sun-swept
        billow,
      Heart to heart in the heart of the summer, lover by lover asleep
          they lay,
    Hearing only the whirring cicala that chirruped awhile at their
          poppied pillow
      Faint and sweet as the murmur of men that laboured in villages far
        away.

    Was not the menace indeed more silent? Ah, what care for labour and
        sorrow?
      Gods in the meadows of moly and amaranth surely might envy their deep
          sweet bed
    Here where the butterflies troubled the lilies of peace, and took no
        thought for the morrow,
      And golden-girdled bees made feast as over the lotus the soft sun
          spread.

    Nearer, nearer the menace glided, out of the gorgeous gloom around
        them,
      Out of the poppy-haunted shadows deep in the heart of the purple
          brake;
    Till through the hush and the heat as they lay, and their own sweet
        listless dreams enwound them,--
      Mailed and mottled with hues of the grape-bloom suddenly, quietly,
          glided the snake.

    Subtle as jealousy, supple as falsehood, diamond-headed and cruel as
        pleasure,
      Coil by coil he lengthened and glided, straight to the fragrant curve
          of her throat:
    There in the print of the last of the kisses that still glowed red from
        the sweet long pressure,
      Fierce as famine and swift as lightning over the glittering lyre he
          smote.


    IV

    And over the cold white body of love and delight
      Orpheus arose in the terrible storm of his grief,
    With quivering up-clutched hands, deadly and white,
      And his whole soul wavered and shook like a wind-swept leaf:

    As a leaf that beats on a mountain, his spirit in vain
      Assaulted his doom and beat on the Gates of Death:
    Then prone with his arms o'er the lyre he sobbed out his pain,
      And the tense chords faintly gave voice to the pulse of his breath.

    And he heard it and rose, once again, with the lyre in his hand,
      And smote out the cry that his white-lipped sorrow denied:
    And the grief's mad ecstasy swept o'er the summer-sweet land,
      And gathered the tears of all Time in the rush of its tide.

    There was never a love forsaken or faith forsworn,
      There was never a cry for the living or moan for the slain,
    But was voiced in that great consummation of song; ay, and borne
      To storm on the Gates of the land whence none cometh again.

    Transcending the barriers of earth, comprehending them all
      He followed the soul of his loss with the night in his eyes;
    And the portals lay bare to him there; and he heard the faint call
      Of his love o'er the rabble that wails by the river of sighs.

    Yea, there in the mountains before him, he knew it of old,
      That portal enormous of gloom, he had seen it in dreams,
    When the secrets of Time and of Fate through his harmonies rolled;
      And behind it he heard the dead moan by their desolate streams.

    And he passed through the Gates with the light and the cloud of his
        song,
      Dry-shod over Lethe he passed to the chasms of hell;
    And the hosts of the dead made mock at him, crying, _How long
      Have we dwelt in the darkness, oh fool, and shall evermore dwell?_

    _Did our lovers not love us?_ the grey skulls hissed in his face;
      _Were our lips not red? Were these cavernous eyes not bright?
    Yet us, whom the soft flesh clothed with such roseate grace,
      Our lovers would loathe if we ever returned to their sight!_

    Oh then, through the soul of the Singer, a pity so vast
      Mixed with his anguish that, smiting anew on his lyre,
    He caught up the sorrows of hell in his utterance at last,
      Comprehending the need of them all in his own great desire.


    V

    And they that were dead, in his radiant music, remembered the
        dawn with its low deep crimson,
      Heard the murmur of doves in the pine-wood, heard the moan of the
        roaming sea,
    Heard and remembered the little kisses, in woods where the last of
        the moon yet swims on
      Fragrant, flower-strewn April nights of young-eyed lovers in Arcady;

    Saw the soft blue veils of shadow floating over the billowy grasses
      Under the crisp white curling clouds that sailed and trailed through
          the melting blue;
    Heard once more the quarrel of lovers above them pass, as a
        lark-song passes,
      Light and bright, till it vanished away in an eye-bright heaven of
          silvery dew.

    Out of the dark, ah, white as the Huntress, cold and sweet as the
        petals that crowned her,
      Fair and fleet as a fawn that shakes the dew from the fern at break
          of day;
    Wreathed with the clouds of her dusky hair that swept in a sun-bright
        glory around her,
      On through the deserts of hell she came, and the brown air bloomed
          with the light of May.

    On through the deserts of hell she came; for over the fierce and frozen
        meadows
      Pleaded ever the Voice of voices, calling his love by her golden name;
    So she arose from her grave in the darkness, and up through the wailing
        fires and shadows,
      On by chasm and cliff and cavern, out of the horrors of death she
          came.

    Then had she followed him, then had he won her, striking a chord that
        should echo for ever,
      Had he been steadfast only a little, nor paused in the great
          transcendent song;
    But ere they had won to the glory of day, he came to the brink of the
        flaming river
      And ceased, to look on his love a moment, a little moment, and
          overlong.


    VI

    O'er Phlegethon he stood:
    Below him roared and flamed
          The flood
    For utmost anguish named.

    And lo, across the night,
    The shining form he knew
          With light
    Swift footsteps upward drew.

    Up through the desolate lands
    She stole, a ghostly star,
          With hands
    Outstretched to him afar.

    With arms outstretched, she came
    In yearning majesty,
          The same
    Royal Eurydice.

    Up through the ghastly dead
    She came, with shining eyes
          And red
    Sweet lips of child-surprise.

    Up through the wizened crowds
    She stole, as steals the moon
          Through clouds
    Of flowery mist in June.

    He gazed: he ceased to smite
    The golden-chorded lyre:
          Delight
    Consumed his heart with fire.

    Though in that deadly land
    His task was but half-done,
          His hand
    Drooped, and the fight half-won.

    He saw the breasts that glowed,
    The fragrant clouds of hair:
          They flowed
    Around him like a snare.

    _O'er Phlegethon he stood,
    For utmost anguish named:
          The flood
    Below him roared and flamed._

    Out of his hand the lyre
    Suddenly slipped and fell,
          The fire
    Acclaimed it into hell.

    The night grew dark again:
    There came a bitter cry
          Of pain,
    _Oh Love, once more I die!_

    And lo, the earth-dawn broke,
    And like a wraith she fled:
          He woke
    Alone: his love was dead.

    He woke on earth: the day
    Shone coldly: at his side
          There lay
    The body of his bride.


    VII

    Only now when the purple vintage bubbles and winks in the autumn glory,
      Only now when the great white oxen drag the weight of the harvest
          home,
    Sunburnt labourers, under the star of the sunset, sing as an old-world
        story
      How two pale and thwarted lovers ever through Arcady still must roam.

    Faint as the silvery mists of morning over the peaks that the
        noonday parches,
      On through the haunts of the gloaming musk-rose, down to the rivers
          that glisten below,
    Ever they wander from meadow to pinewood, under the whispering
        woodbine arches,
      Faint as the mists of the dews of the dusk when violets dream and
          the moon-winds blow.

    Though the golden lute of Orpheus gathered the splendours of
        earth and heaven,
      All the golden greenwood notes and all the chimes of the changing sea,
    Old men over the fires of winter murmur again that he was not given
      The steadfast heart divine to rule that infinite freedom of harmony.

    Therefore he failed, say they; but we, that have no wisdom, can
        only remember
      How through the purple perfumed pinewoods white Eurydice roamed and
          sung:
    How through the whispering gold of the wheat, where the poppy burned
        like a crimson ember,
      Down to the valley in beauty she came, and under her feet the flowers
          upsprung.

    _Down to the valley she came, for far and far below in the dreaming
        meadows
      Pleaded ever the Voice of voices, calling his love by her golden name;
    So she arose from her home in the hills, and down through the blossoms
        that danced with their shadows,
      Out of the blue of the dreaming distance, down to the heart of her
          lover she came._




FROM THE SHORE


    Love, so strangely lost and found,
      Love, beyond the seas of death,
    Love, immortally re-crowned,
      Love, who swayest this mortal breath,
    Sweetlier to thy lover's ear
      Steals the tale that ne'er was told;
    Bright-eyes, ah, thine arms are near,
      Nearer now than e'er of old.

    When on earth thy hands were mine,
      Mine to hold for evermore,
    Oft we watched the sunset shine
      Lonely from this wave-beat shore;
    Pent in prison-cells of clay,
      Time had power on thee and me:
    Thou and heaven are one to-day,
      One with earth and sky and sea;

    Indivisible and one!
      Beauty hath unlocked the Gate,
    Oped the portals of the sun,
      Burst the bars of Time and Fate!
    Violets in the dawn of Spring
      Hold the secret of thine eyes:
    Lilies bare their breasts and fling
      Scents of thee from Paradise.

    Brooklets have thy talk by rote;
      Thy farewells array the West;
    Fur that clasped thee round the throat
      Leaps--a squirrel--to its nest!
    Backward from a sparkling eye
      Half-forgotten jests return
    Where the rabbit lollops by
      Hurry-scurry through the fern!

    Roses where I lonely pass
      Brush my brow and breathe thy kiss:
    Zephyrs, whispering through the grass,
      Lure me on from bliss to bliss:
    Here thy robe is rustling close,
      There thy fluttering lace is blown,--
    All the tide of beauty flows
      Tributary to thine own.

    Birds that sleek their shining throats
      Capture every curve from thee:
    All their golden warbled notes,
      Fragments of thy melody,
    Crowding, clustering, one by one,
      Build it upward, spray by spray,
    Till the lavrock in the sun
      Pours thy rapture down the day.

    Silver birch and purple pine,
      Crumpled fern and crimson rose,
    Flash to feel their beauty thine,
      Clasp and fold thee, warm and close:
    Every beat and gleam of wings
      Holds thee in its bosom furled;
    All that chatters, laughs, and sings,
      Darts thy sparkle round the world.

    _Love, so strangely lost and found,
      Love, beyond the seas of death,
    Love, immortally re-crowned,
      Love, who swayest this mortal breath,
    Sweetlier to thy lover's ear
      Steals the tale that ne'er was told;
    Bright eyes, ah, thine arms are near,
      Nearer now than e'er of old._




THE RETURN


    O, hedges white with laughing may,
      O, meadows where we met,
    This heart of mine will break to-day
      Unless ye, too, forget.

    Breathe not so sweet, breathe not so sweet,
      But swiftly let me pass
    Across the fields that felt her feet
      In the old time that was.

    A year ago, but one brief year,
      O, happy flowering land,
    We wandered here and whispered there,
      And hand was warm in hand.

    O, crisp white clouds beyond the hill,
      O, lavrock in the skies,
    Why do ye all remember still
      Her bright uplifted eyes.

    Red heather on the windy moor,
      Wild thyme beside the way,
    White jasmine by the cottage door,
      Harden your hearts to-day.

    Smile not so kind, smile not so kind,
      Thou happy haunted place,
    Or thou wilt strike these poor eyes blind
      With her remembered face.




REMEMBRANCE


    O, unforgotten lips, grey haunting eyes,
      Soft curving cheeks and heart-remembered brow,
    It is all true, the old love never dies;
      And, parted, we must meet for ever now.

    We did not think it true! We did not think
      Love meant this universal cry of pain,
    This crown of thorn, this vinegar to drink,
      This lonely crucifixion o'er again.

    Yet through the darkness of the sleepless night
      Your tortured face comes meekly answering mine;
    Dumb, but I know why those mute lips are white;
      Dark, but I know why those dark lashes shine.

    O, love, love, love, what death can set us free
    From this implacable ghost of memory?




A PRAYER


    Only a little, O Father, only to rest
      Or ever the night comes and the eternal sleep,
      Only to rest a little, a little to weep
    In the dead love's pitiful arms, on the dead love's breast,

    A little to loosen the frozen fountains, to free
      Rivers of blood and tears that should slacken the pulse
      Of this pitiless heart, and appease these pangs that convulse
    Body and soul; oh, out of Eternity,

    A moment to whisper, only a moment to tell
      My dead, my dead, what words are so helpless to say--
      The dreams unuttered, the prayers no passion could pray,
    And then--the eternal sleep or the pains of hell,

    I could welcome them, Father, gladly as ever a child
      Laying his head on the pillow might turn to his rest
      And remember in dreams, as the hand of the mother is prest
    On his hair, how the Pitiful blessed him of old and smiled.




LOVE'S GHOST


    I

    Thy house is dark and still: I stand once more
            Beside the marble door.
    It opens as of old: thy pale, pale face
            Peers thro' the narrow space:
    Thy hands are mine, thy hands are mine to hold,
            Just as of old.


    II

    "Hush! hush! or God will hear us! Ah, speak low
            As Love spake long ago."
    "Sweet, sweet, are these thine arms, thy breast, thy hair
            Assuaging my despair,
    Assuaging the long thirst, quenching the tears
            Of all these years?


    III

    "Thy house is deep and still: God cannot hear;
            Sweet, have no fear!
    Are not thy cold lips crushed against my kiss?
            Love gives us this,
    Not God;" but "Ah," she moans, "God hears us; speak,
            Speak low, hide cheek on cheek."


    IV

    Oh then what eager whisperings, hoarded long,
            Sweeter than any song,
    What treasured news to tell, what hopes, what fears,
            Gleaned from the barren years,
    What raptures wrung from out the heart of pain,
            What wild farewells again!


    V

    Whose pity is this? Ah, quick, one kiss! Once more
            Closes the marble door!
    I grope here in the darkness all alone.
            Across the cold white stone,
    Over thy tomb, a sudden starlight gleams:
            Death gave me this--in dreams.




ON A RAILWAY PLATFORM


    A drizzle of drifting rain
      And a blurred white lamp o'erhead,
    That shines as my love will shine again
      In the world of the dead.

    Round me the wet black night,
      And, afar in the limitless gloom,
    Crimson and green, two blossoms of light,
      Two stars of doom.

    But the night of death is aflare
      With a torch of back-blown fire,
    And the coal-black deeps of the quivering air
      Rend for my soul's desire.

    Leap, heart, for the pulse and the roar
      And the lights of the streaming train
    That leaps with the heart of thy love once more
      Out of the mist and the rain.

    Out of the desolate years
      The thundering pageant flows;
    But I see no more than a window of tears
      Which her face has turned to a rose.




OXFORD REVISITED


    Changed and estranged, like a ghost, I pass the familiar portals,
      Echoing now like a tomb, they accept me no more as of old;
    Yet I go wistfully onward, a shade thro' a kingdom of mortals
      Wanting a face to greet me, a hand to grasp and to hold.

    Hardly I know as I go if the beautiful City is only
      Mocking me under the moon, with its streams and its willows agleam,
    Whether the City or friends or I that am friendless and lonely,
      Whether the boys that go by or the time-worn towers be the dream;

    Whether the walls that I know, or the unknown fugitive faces,
      Faces like those that I loved, faces that haunt and waylay,
    Faces so like and unlike, in the dim unforgettable places,
      Startling the heart into sickness that aches with the sweet of
        the May,--

    Whether all these or the world with its wars be the wandering shadows!
      Ah, sweet over green-gloomed waters the may hangs, crimson and white;
    And quiet canoes creep down by the warm gold dusk of the meadows,
      Lapping with little splashes and ripples of silvery light.

    Others as I have returned: I shall see the old faces to-morrow,
      Down by the gay-coloured barges, alert for the throb of the oars,
    Wanting to row once again, or tenderly jesting with sorrow
      Up the old stairways and noting the strange new names on the doors.

    Is it a dream? And I know not nor care if there be an awaking
      Ever at all any more, for the years that have torn us apart,
    Few, so few as they are, will ever be rending and breaking:
      Sooner by far than I knew have they wrought this change for my heart!

    Well; I grow used to it now! Could the dream but remain and for ever,
      With the flowers round the grey quadrangle laughing as time grows old!
    For the waters go down to the sea, but the sky still gleams on the river!
      We plucked them--but there shall be lilies, ivory lilies and gold.

    And still, in the beautiful City, the river of life is no duller,
      Only a little strange as the eighth hour dreamily chimes,
    In the City of friends and echoes, ribbons and music and colour,
      Lilac and blossoming chestnut, willows and whispering limes.

    Over the Radcliffe Dome the moon as the ghost of a flower
      Weary and white awakes in the phantom fields of the sky:
    The trustful shepherded clouds are asleep over steeple and tower,
      Dark under Magdalen walls the Cher like a dream goes by.

    Back, we come wandering back, poor ghosts, to the home that one misses
      Out in the shelterless world, the world that was heaven to us then,
    Back from the coil and the vastness, the stars and the boundless abysses,
      Like monks from a pilgrimage stealing in bliss to their cloisters
        again.

    City of dreams that we lost, accept now the gift we inherit--
      Love, such a love as we knew not of old in the blaze of our noon,
    We that have found thee at last, half City, half heavenly Spirit,
      While over a mist of spires the sunset mellows the moon.




THE THREE SHIPS

(_To an old Tune_)


    I

    As I went up the mountain-side,
    The sea below me glittered wide,
    And, Eastward, far away, I spied
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    The three great ships that take the tide
            On Christmas Day in the morning.


    II

    Ye have heard the song, how these must ply
    From the harbours of home to the ports o' the sky!
    Do ye dream none knoweth the whither and why
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    The three great ships go sailing by
            On Christmas Day in the morning?


    III

    Yet, as I live, I never knew
    That ever a song could ring so true,
    Till I saw them break thro' a haze of blue
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And the marvellous ancient flags they flew
            On Christmas Day in the morning!


    IV

    From the heights above the belfried town
    I saw that the sails were patched and brown,
    But the flags were a-flame with a great renown
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    And on every mast was a golden crown
            On Christmas Day in the morning.


    V

    Most marvellous ancient ships were these!
    Were their prows a-plunge to the Chersonese?
    For the pomp of Rome or the glory of Greece,
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    Were they out on a quest for the Golden Fleece
            On Christmas Day in the morning?


    VI

    And the sun and the wind they told me there
    How goodly a load the three ships bear,
    For the first is gold and the second is myrrh
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And the third is frankincense most rare
            On Christmas Day in the morning.


    VII

    They have mixed their shrouds with the golden sky,
    They have faded away where the last dreams die ...
    Ah yet, will ye watch, when the mist lifts high
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day?
    Will ye see three ships come sailing by
            On Christmas Day in the morning?




SLUMBER-SONGS OF THE MADONNA


PRELUDE


    Dante saw the great white Rose
            Half unclose;
    Dante saw the golden bees
      Gathering from its heart of gold
            Sweets untold,
    Love's most honeyed harmonies.

    Dante saw the threefold bow
            Strangely glow,
    Saw the Rainbow Vision rise,
      And the Flame that wore the crown
            Bending down
    O'er the flowers of Paradise.

    Something yet remained, it seems;
            In his dreams
    Dante missed--as angels may
      In their white and burning bliss--
            Some small kiss
    Mortals meet with every day.

    Italy in splendour faints
            'Neath her saints!
    O, her great Madonnas, too,
      Faces calm as any moon
            Glows in June,
    Hooded with the night's deep blue!

    What remains? I pass and hear
            Everywhere,
    Ay, or see in silent eyes
      Just the song she still would sing
            Thus--a-swing
    O'er the cradle where He lies.


    I

    Sleep, little baby, I love thee.
    Sleep, little king, I am bending above thee.
            How should I know what to sing
    Here in my arms as I swing thee to sleep?
                    Hushaby low,
                    Rockaby so,
    Kings may have wonderful jewels to bring,
    Mother has only a kiss for her king!
    Why should my singing so make me to weep?
    Only I know that I love thee, I love thee,
            Love thee, my little one, sleep.


    II

      Is it a dream? Ah yet, it seems
      Not the same as other dreams!
    I can but think that angels sang,
      When thou wast born, in the starry sky,
    And that their golden harps out-rang
      While the silver clouds went by!

    The morning sun shuts out the stars,
      Which are much loftier than the sun;
    But, could we burst our prison-bars
      And find the Light whence light begun,
    The dreams that heralded thy birth
    Were truer than the truths of earth;
    And, by that far immortal Gleam,
    Soul of my soul, I still would dream!

    A ring of light was round thy head,
    The great-eyed oxen nigh thy bed
    Their cold and innocent noses bowed!
    Their sweet breath rose like an incense cloud
    In the blurred and mystic lanthorn light.

    About the middle of the night
    The black door blazed like some great star
    With a glory from afar,
    Or like some mighty chrysolite
    Wherein an angel stood with white
    Blinding arrowy bladed wings
    Before the throne of the King of kings;
    And, through it, I could dimly see
    A great steed tethered to a tree.

    Then, with crimson gems aflame
    Through the door the three kings came,
    And the black Ethiop unrolled
    The richly broidered cloth of gold,
    And pourèd forth before thee there
    Gold and frankincense and myrrh!


    III

    See, what a wonderful smile! Does it mean
      That my little one knows of my love?
    Was it meant for an angel that passed unseen,
      And smiled at us both from above?
    Does it mean that he knows of the birds and the flowers
    That are waiting to sweeten his childhood's hours,
    And the tales I shall tell and the games he will play,
    And the songs we shall sing and the prayers we shall pray
                    In his boyhood's May,
                    He and I, one day?


    IV

    For in the warm blue summer weather
    We shall laugh and love together:
      I shall watch my baby growing,
    I shall guide his feet,
      When the orange trees are blowing
    And the winds are heavy and sweet!

      When the orange orchards whiten
      I shall see his great eyes brighten
    To watch the long-legged camels going
      Up the twisted street,
    When the orange trees are blowing
      And the winds are sweet.

    _What does it mean? Indeed, it seems
    A dream! Yet not like other dreams!_

    We shall walk in pleasant vales,
      Listening to the shepherd's song
    I shall tell him lovely tales
      All day long:
    He shall laugh while mother sings
    Tales of fishermen and kings.

    He shall see them come and go
      O'er the wistful sea,
    Where rosy oleanders blow
      Round blue Lake Galilee,
    Kings with fishers' ragged coats
    And silver nets across their boats,
    Dipping through the starry glow,
    With crowns for him and me!
            Ah, no;
    Crowns for him, not me!

    _Rockaby so! Indeed, it seems
    A dream! Yet not like other dreams!_


    V

    Ah, see what a wonderful smile again!
      Shall I hide it away in my heart,
    To remember one day in a world of pain
      When the years have torn us apart,
            Little babe,
    When the years have torn us apart?

    Sleep, my little one, sleep,
      Child with the wonderful eyes,
      Wild miraculous eyes,
    Deep as the skies are deep!
    What star-bright glory of tears
    Waits in you now for the years
    That shall bid you waken and weep?
    Ah, in that day, could I kiss you to sleep
    Then, little lips, little eyes,
    Little lips that are lovely and wise,
    Little lips that are dreadful and wise!


    VI

    Clenched little hands like crumpled roses
            Dimpled and dear,
    Feet like flowers that the dawn uncloses,
            What do I fear?
    Little hands, will you ever be clenched in anguish?
    White little limbs, will you droop and languish?
            Nay, what do I hear?
    I hear a shouting, far away,
    You shall ride on a kingly palm-strewn way
            Some day!

    But when you are crowned with a golden crown
        And throned on a golden throne,
    You'll forget the manger of Bethlehem town
        And your mother that sits alone

    Wondering whether the mighty king
    Remembers a song she used to sing,
            Long ago,
            "_Rockaby so,
    Kings may have wonderful jewels to bring,
    Mother has only a kiss for her king_!"...

    Ah, see what a wonderful smile, once more!
        He opens his great dark eyes!
    Little child, little king, nay, hush, it is o'er
        My fear of those deep twin skies,--
          Little child,
        You are all too dreadful and wise!


    VII

    But now you are mine, all mine,
      And your feet can lie in my hand so small,
    And your tiny hands in my heart can twine,
      And you cannot walk, so you never shall fall,
    Or be pierced by the thorns beside the door,
    Or the nails that lie upon Joseph's floor;
    Through sun and rain, through shadow and shine,
      You are mine, all mine!




ENCELADUS


    _In the Black Country, from a little window,
    Before I slept, across the haggard wastes
    Of dust and ashes, I saw Titanic shafts
    Like shadowy columns of wan-hope arise
    To waste, on the blear sky, their slow sad wreaths
    Of smoke, their infinitely sad slow prayers.
    Then, as night deepened, the blast-furnaces,
    Red smears upon the sulphurous blackness, turned
    All that sad region to a City of Dis,
    Where naked, sweating giants all night long
    Bowed their strong necks, melted flesh, blood and bone,
    To brim the dry ducts of the gods of gloom
    With terrible rivers, branches of living gold._

    _O, like some tragic gesture of great souls
    In agony, those awful columns towered
    Against the clouds, that city of ash and slag
    Assumed the grandeur of some direr Thebes
    Arising to the death-chant of those gods,
    A dreadful Order climbing from the dark
    Of Chaos and Corruption, threatening to take
    Heaven with its vast slow storm.
                                  I slept, and dreamed.
    And like the slow beats of some Titan heart
    Buried beneath immeasurable woes,
    The forging-hammers thudded through the dream:_

    Huge on a fallen tree,
    Lost in the darkness of primeval woods,
    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    The naked giant, brooded all alone.
    Born of the lower earth, he knew not how,
    Born of the mire and clay, he knew not when,
    Brought forth in darkness, and he knew not why!

    Thus, like a wind, went by a thousand years.

    Anhungered, yet no comrade of the wolf,
    And cold, but with no power upon the sun,
    A master of this world that mastered him!

    Thus, like a cloud, went by a thousand years.

    _Who_ chained this other giant in his heart
    That heaved and burned like Etna? Heavily
    He bent his brows and wondered and was dumb.

    And, like one wave, a thousand years went by.

    He raised his matted head and scanned the stars.
    He stood erect! He lifted his uncouth arms!
    With inarticulate sounds his uncouth lips
    Wrestled and strove--_I am full-fed, and yet
    I hunger!
    Who set this fiercer famine in my maw?_

    _Can I eat moons, gorge on the Milky Way,
    Swill sunsets down, or sup the wash of the dawn
    Out of the rolling swine-troughs of the sea?
    Can I drink oceans, lie beneath the mountains,
    And nuzzle their heavy boulders like a cub
    Sucking the dark teats of the tigress? Who,
    Who set this deeper hunger in my heart?_
    And the dark forest echoed--_Who? Ah, who?_

    "_I hunger!_"
    And the night-wind answered him,
    "Hunt, then, for food."

    "_I hunger!_"
    And the sleek gorged lioness
    Drew nigh him, dripping freshly from the kill,
    Redder her lolling tongue, whiter her fangs,
    And gazed with ignorant eyes of golden flame.

    "_I hunger!_"
    Like a breaking sea his cry
    Swept through the night. Against his swarthy knees
    She rubbed the red wet velvet of her ears
    With mellow thunders of unweeting bliss,
    Purring--_Ah, seek, and you shall find.
    Ah, seek, and you shall slaughter, gorge, ah seek,
    Seek, seek, you shall feed full, ah seek, ah seek._

    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    Bewildered like a desert-pilgrim, saw
    A rosy City, opening in the clouds,
    The hunger-born mirage of his own heart,
    Far, far above the world, a home of gods,
    Where One, a goddess, veiled in the sleek waves
    Of her deep hair, yet glimmering golden through,
    Lifted, with radiant arms, ambrosial food
    For hunger such as this! Up the dark hills,
    He rushed, a thunder-cloud,
    Urged by the famine of his heart. He stood
    High on the topmost crags, he hailed the gods
    In thunder, and the clouds re-echoed it!

    He hailed the gods!
    And like a sea of thunder round their thrones
    Washing, a midnight sea, his earth-born voice
    Besieged the halls of heaven! He hailed the gods!
    They laughed, he heard them laugh!
    With echo and re-echo, far and wide,
    A golden sea of mockery, they laughed!

    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    Laid hold upon the rosy Gates of Heaven,
    And shook them with gigantic sooty hands,
    Asking he knew not what, but not for alms;
    And the Gates, opened as in jest;
    And, like a sooty jest, he stumbled in.

    Round him the gods, the young and scornful gods,
    Clustered and laughed to mark the ravaged face,
    The brutal brows, the deep and dog-like eyes,
    The blunt black nails, and back with burdens bowed.
    And, when they laughed, he snarled with uncouth lips
    And made them laugh again.
                              "_Whence comest thou?_"
    He could not speak!
    How should he speak whose heart within him heaved
    And burned like Etna? Through his mouth there came
    A sound of ice-bergs in a frozen sea
    Of tears, a sullen region of black ice
    Rending and breaking, very far away.
    They laughed!
    He stared at them, bewildered, and they laughed
    Again, "_Whence comest thou?_"

    He could not speak!
    But through his mouth a moan of midnight woods,
    Where wild beasts lay in wait to slaughter and gorge,
    A moan of forest-caverns where the wolf
    Brought forth her litter, a moan of the wild earth
    In travail with strange shapes of mire and clay,
    Creatures of clay, clay images of the gods,
    That hungered like the gods, the most high gods,
    But found no food, and perished like the beasts.

    And the gods laughed,--
    _Art thou, then, such a god?_ And, like a leaf
    Unfolding in dark woods, in his deep brain
    A sudden memory woke; and like an ape
    He nodded, and all heaven with laughter rocked,
    While Artemis cried out with scornful lips,--
    _Perchance He is the Maker of you all!_

    Then, piteously outstretching calloused hands,
    He sank upon his knees, his huge gnarled knees,
    And echoed, falteringly, with slow harsh tongue,--
    _Perchance, perchance, the Maker of you all._

    They wept with laughter! And Aphrodite, she,
    With keener mockery than white Artemis
    Who smiled aloof, drew nigh him unabashed
    In all her blinding beauty. Carelessly,
    As o'er the brute brows of a stallèd ox
    Across that sooty muzzle and brawny breast,
    Contemptuously, she swept her golden hair
    In one deep wave, a many-millioned scourge
    Intolerable and beautiful as fire;
    Then turned and left him, reeling, gasping, dumb,
    While heaven re-echoed and re-echoed, _See,
    Perchance, perchance, the Maker of us all!_

    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    Rose to his feet, and with one terrible cry
    "_I hunger_," rushed upon the scornful gods
    And strove to seize and hold them with his hands,
    And still the laughter deepened as they rolled
    Their clouds around them, baffling him. But once,
    Once with a shout, in his gigantic arms
    He crushed a slippery splendour on his breast
    And felt on his harsh skin the cool smooth peaks
    Of Aphrodite's bosom. One black hand
    Slid down the naked snow of her long side
    And bruised it where he held her. Then, like snow
    Vanishing in a furnace, out of his arms
    The splendour suddenly melted, and a roll
    Of thunder split the dream, and headlong down
    He fell, from heaven to earth; while, overhead
    The young and scornful gods--he heard them laugh!--
    Toppled the crags down after him. He lay
    Supine. They plucked up Etna by the roots
    And buried him beneath it. His broad breast
    Heaved, like that other giant in his heart,
    And through the crater burst his fiery breath,
    But could not burst his bonds. And so he lay
    Breathing in agony thrice a thousand years.

    Then came a Voice, he knew not whence, "Arise,
    Enceladus!" And from his heart a crag
    Fell, and one arm was free, and one thought free,
    And suddenly he awoke, and stood upright,
    Shaking the mountains from him like a dream;
    And the tremendous light and awful truth
    Smote, like the dawn, upon his blinded eyes,
    That out of his first wonder at the world,
    Out of his own heart's deep humility,
    And simple worship, he had fashioned gods
    Of cloud, and heaven out of a hollow shell.
    And groping now no more in the empty space
    Outward, but inward in his own deep heart,
    He suddenly felt the secret gates of heaven
    Open, and from the infinite heavens of hope
    Inward, a voice, from the innermost courts of Love,
    Rang--_Thou shall have none other gods but Me._

    Enceladus, the foul Enceladus,
    When the clear light out of that inward heaven
    Whose gates are only inward in the soul,
    Showed him that one true Kingdom, said,
                                   "I will stretch
    My hands out once again. And, as the God
    That made me is the Heart within my heart,
    So shall my heart be to this dust and earth
    A god and a creator. I will strive
    With mountains, fires and seas, wrestle and strive,
    Fashion and make, and that which I have made
    In anguish I shall love as God loves me."

    _In the Black Country, from a little window,
    Waking at dawn, I saw those giant Shafts
    --O great dark word out of our elder speech,
    Long since the poor man's kingly heritage--
    The Shapings, the dim Sceptres of Creation,
    The Shafts like columns of wan-hope arise
    To waste, on the blear sky, their slow sad wreaths
    Of smoke, their infinitely sad slow prayers.
    Then, as the dawn crimsoned, the sordid clouds,
    The puddling furnaces, the mounds of slag,
    The cinders, and the sand-beds and the rows
    Of wretched roofs, assumed a majesty
    Beyond all majesties of earth or air;
    Beauty beyond all beauty, as of a child
    In rags, upraised thro' the still gold of heaven,
    With wasted arms and hungering eyes, to bring
    The armoured seraphim down upon their knees
    And teach eternal God humility;
    The solemn beauty of the unfulfilled
    Moving towards fulfilment on a height
    Beyond all heights; the dreadful beauty of hope;
    The naked wrestler struggling from the rock
    Under the sculptor's chisel; the rough mass
    Of clay more glorious for the poor blind face
    And bosom that half emerge into the light,
    More glorious and august, even in defeat,
    Than that too cold dominion God foreswore
    To bear this passionate universal load,
    This Calvary of Creation, with mankind._


IN THE COOL OF THE EVENING

    I

    In the cool of the evening, when the low sweet whispers waken,
      When the labourers turn them homeward, and the weary have their will,
    When the censers of the roses o'er the forest-aisles are shaken,
      Is it but the wind that cometh o'er the far green hill?


    II

    For they say 'tis but the sunset winds that wander through the heather,
      Rustle all the meadow-grass and bend the dewy fern;
    They say 'tis but the winds that bow the reeds in prayer together,
      And fill the shaken pools with fire along the shadowy burn.


    III

    In the beauty of the twilight, in the Garden that He loveth,
      They have veiled His lovely vesture with the darkness of a name!
    Thro' His Garden, thro' His Garden it is but the wind that moveth,
      No more; but O, the miracle, the miracle is the same!


    IV

    In the cool of the evening, when the sky is an old story
      Slowly dying, but remembered, ay, and loved with passion still,
    Hush!... the fringes of His garment, in the fading golden glory,
      Softly rustling as He cometh o'er the far green hill.




A ROUNDHEAD'S RALLYING SONG


    I

    How beautiful is the battle,
      How splendid are the spears,
    When our banner is the sky
    And our watchword _Liberty_,
      And our kingdom lifted high above the years.


    II

    How purple shall our blood be,
      How glorious our scars,
    When we lie there in the night
    With our faces full of light
      And the death upon them smiling at the stars.


    III

    How golden is our hauberk,
      And steel, and steel our sword,
    And our shield without a stain
    As we take the field again,
      We whose armour is the armour of the Lord!




VICISTI, GALILÆE


    "The shrines are dust, the gods are dead,"
      They cried in ancient Rome!
    "Ah yet, the Idalian rose is red,
      And bright the Paphian foam:
    For all your Galilæan tears
      We turn to her," men say ...
    But we, we hasten thro' the years
      To our own yesterday.

    Thro' all the thousand years ye need
      To make the lost so fair,
    Before ye can award His meed
      Of perfect praise and prayer!
    Ye liberated souls, the crown
      Is yours; and yet, some few
    Can hail, as this great Cross goes down
      Its distant triumph, too.

    Poor scornful Lilliputian souls,
      And are ye still too proud
    To risk your little aureoles
      By kneeling with the crowd?
    Do ye still dream ye "stand alone"
      So fearless and so strong?
    To-day we claim the rebels' throne
      And leave you with the throng.

    Yes, He has conquered! You at least
      The "van-guard" leaves behind
    To croon old tales of king and priest
      In the ingles of mankind:
    The breast of Aphrodite glows,
      Apollo's face is fair;
    But O, the world's wide anguish knows
      No Apollonian prayer.

    Not ours to scorn the first white gleam
      Of beauty on this earth,
    The clouds of dawn, the nectarous dream,
      The gods of simpler birth;
    But, as ye praise them, your own cry
      Is fraught with deeper pain,
    And the Compassionate ye deny
      Returns, returns again.

    O, worshippers of the beautiful,
      Is this the end then, this,--
    That ye can only see the skull
      Beneath the face of bliss?
    No monk in the dark years ye scorn
      So barren a pathway trod
    As ye who, ceasing not to mourn,
      Deny the mourner's God.

    And, while ye scoff, on every side
      Great hints of Him go by,--
    Souls that are hourly crucified
      On some new Calvary!
    O, tortured faces, white and meek,
      Half seen amidst the crowd,
    Grey suffering lips that never speak,
      The Glory in the Cloud!

    _In flower and dust, in chaff and grain,
      He binds Himself and dies!
    We live by His eternal pain,
      His hourly sacrifice;
    The limits of our mortal life
      Are His._ The whisper thrills
    Under the sea's perpetual strife,
      And through the sunburnt hills.

    Darkly, as in a glass, our sight
      Still gropes thro' Time and Space:
    We cannot see the Light of Light
      With angels, face to face:
    Only the tale His martyrs tell
      Around the dark earth rings
    He died and He went down to hell
      And lives--the King of Kings!

    And, while ye scoff, from shore to shore,
      From sea to moaning sea,
    _Eloi_, _Eloi_, goes up once more
      _Lama sabacthani!_
    The heavens are like a scroll unfurled,
      The writing flames above--
    This is the King of all the world
      Upon His Cross of Love.




DRAKE

_DEDICATED TO RUDOLPH CHAMBERS LEHMANN_




PROLOGUE TO AMERICAN EDITION


    I

      England, my mother,
        Lift to my western sweetheart
    One full cup of English mead, breathing of the may!
      Pledge the may-flower in her face that you and ah, none other,
        Sent her from the mother-land
          Across the dashing spray.


    II


      Hers and yours the story:
        Think of it, oh, think of it--
    That immortal dream when El Dorado flushed the skies!
      Fill the beaker full and drink to Drake's undying glory,
        Yours and hers (Oh, drink of it!)
          The dream that never dies.


    III

      Yours and hers the free-men
        Who scanned the stars and westward sung
    When a king commanded and the Atlantic thundered "Nay!"
      Hers as yours the pride is, for Drake our first of seamen
        First upon his bow-sprit hung
          That bunch of English may.


    IV

      Pledge her deep, my mother;
        Through her veins thy life-stream runs!
    Spare a thought, too, sweetheart, for my mother o'er the sea!
      Younger eyes are yours; but ah, those old eyes and none other
        Once bedewed the may-flower; once,
          As yours, were clear and free.


    V

      Once! Nay, now as ever
        Beats within her ancient heart
    All the faith that took you forth to seek your heaven alone:
      Shadows come and go; but let no shade of doubt dissever,
        Cloak, or cloud, or keep apart
          Two souls whose prayer is one.


    VI

      Sweetheart, ah, be tender--
        Tender with her prayer to-night!
    Such a goal might yet be ours!--the battle-flags be furled,
      All the wars of earth be crushed, if only now your slender
        Hand should grasp her gnarled old hand
          And federate the world.


    VII

      Foolish it may seem, sweet!
        Still the battle thunder lours:
    Darker look the Dreadnoughts as old Europe goes her way!
      Yet your hand, your hand, has power to crush that evil dream, sweet;
        You, with younger eyes than ours
          And brows of English may.


    VIII

      If a singer cherishes
        Idle dreams or idle words,
    You shall judge--and you'll forgive: for, far away or nigh,
      Still abides that Vision without which a people perishes:
        Love will strike the atoning chords!
          Hark--there comes a cry!


    IX

      Over all this earth, sweet,
        The poor and weak look up to you--
    Lift their burdened shoulders, stretch their fettered hands in prayer:
      You, with gentle hands, can bring the world-wide dream to birth, sweet,
        While I lift this cup to you
          And wonder--will she care?


    X

      Kindle, eyes, and beat, heart!
        Hold the brimming breaker up!
    All the may is burgeoning from East to golden West!
      England, my mother, greet America, my sweetheart:
        --Ah, but ere I drained the cup
          I found her on your breast.




EXORDIUM


    When on the highest ridge of that strange land,
    Under the cloudless blinding tropic blue,
    Drake and his band of swarthy seamen stood
    With dazed eyes gazing round them, emerald fans
    Of palm that fell like fountains over cliffs
    Of gorgeous red anana bloom obscured
    Their sight on every side. Illustrious gleams
    Of rose and green and gold streamed from the plumes
    That flashed like living rainbows through the glades.
    Piratic glints of musketoon and sword,
    The scarlet scarves around the tawny throats,
    The bright gold ear-rings in the sun-black ears,
    And the calm faces of the negro guides
    Opposed their barbarous bravery to the noon;
    Yet a deep silence dreadfully besieged
    Even those mighty hearts upon the verge
    Of the undiscovered world. Behind them lay
    The old earth they knew. In front they could not see
    What lay beyond the ridge. Only they heard
    Cries of the painted birds troubling the heat
    And shivering through the woods; till Francis Drake
    Plunged through the hush, took hold upon a tree,
    The tallest near them, and clomb upward, branch
    By branch.
                And there, as he swung clear above
    The steep-down forest, on his wondering eyes,
    Mile upon mile of rugged shimmering gold,
    Burst the unknown immeasurable sea.
    Then he descended; and with a new voice
    Vowed that, God helping, he would one day plough
    Those virgin waters with an English keel.

    So here before the unattempted task,
    Above the Golden Ocean of my dream
    I clomb and saw in splendid pageant pass
    The wild adventures and heroic deeds
    Of England's epic age, a vision lit
    With mighty prophecies, fraught with a doom
    Worthy the great Homeric roll of song,
    Yet all unsung and unrecorded quite
    By those who might have touched with Raphael's hand
    The large imperial legend of our race,
    Ere it brought forth the braggarts of an hour,
    Self-worshippers who love their imaged strength,
    And as a symbol for their own proud selves
    Misuse the sacred name of this dear land,
    While England to the Empire of her soul
    Like some great Prophet passes through the crowd
    That cannot understand; for he must climb
    Up to that sovran thunder-smitten peak
    Where he shall grave and trench on adamant
    The Law that God shall utter by the still
    Small voice, not by the whirlwind or the fire.
    There labouring for the Highest in himself
    He shall achieve the good of all mankind;
    And from that lonely Sinai shall return
    Triumphant o'er the little gods of gold
    That rule their little hour upon the plain.

    Oh, thou blind master of these opened eyes
    Be near me, therefore, now; for not in pride
    I lift lame hands to this imperious theme;
    But yearning to a power above mine own
    Even as a man might lift his hands in prayer.
    Or as a child, perchance, in those dark days
    When London lay beleaguered and the axe
    Flashed out for a bigot empire; and the blood
    Of martyrs made a purple path for Spain
    Up to the throne of Mary; as a child
    Gathering with friends upon a winter's morn
    For some mock fight between the hateful prince
    Philip and Thomas Wyatt, all at once
    Might see in gorgeous ruffs embastioned
    Popinjay plumes and slouching hats of Spain,
    Gay shimmering silks and rich encrusted gems,
    Gold collars, rare brocades, and sleek trunk-hose
    The Ambassador and peacock courtiers come
    Strutting along the white snow-strangled street,
    A walking plot of scarlet Spanish flowers,
    And with one cry a hundred boyish hands
    Put them to flight with snowballs, while the wind
    All round their Spanish ears hissed like a flight
    Of white-winged geese; so may I wage perchance
    A mimic war with all my heart in it,
    Munitioned with mere perishable snow
    Which mightier hands one day will urge with steel.
    Yet may they still remember me as I
    Remember, with one little laugh of love,
    That child's game, this were wealth enough for me.

    Mother and love, fair England, hear my prayer;
    Help me that I may tell the enduring tale
    Of that great seaman, good at need, who first
    Sailed round this globe and made one little isle,
    One little isle against that huge Empire
    Of Spain whose might was paramount on earth,
    O'ertopping Babylon, Nineveh, Greece, and Rome,
    Carthage and all huge Empires of the past,
    He made this little isle, against the world,
    Queen of the earth and sea. Nor this alone
    The theme; for, in a mightier strife engaged
    Even than he knew, he fought for the new faiths,
    Championing our manhood as it rose
    And cast its feudal chains before the seat
    Of kings; nay, in a mightier battle yet
    He fought for the soul's freedom, fought the fight
    Which, though it still rings in our wondering ears,
    Was won then and for ever--that great war,
    That last Crusade of Christ against His priests,
    Wherein Spain fell behind a thunderous roar
    Of ocean triumph over burning ships
    And shattered fleets, while England, England rose,
    Her white cliffs laughing out across the waves,
    Victorious over all her enemies.

    And while he won the world for her domain,
    Her loins brought forth, her fostering bosom fed
    Souls that have swept the spiritual seas
    From heaven to hell, and justified her crown.
    For round the throne of great Elizabeth
    Spenser and Burleigh, Sidney and Verulam,
    Clustered like stars, rare Jonson like the crown
    Of Cassiopeia, Marlowe ruddy as Mars,
    And over all those mighty hearts arose
    The soul of Shakespeare brooding far and wide
    Beyond our small horizons, like a light
    Thrown from a vaster sun that still illumes
    Tracts which the arc of our increasing day
    Must still leave undiscovered, unexplored.

    Mother and love, fair England, hear my prayer,
    As thou didst touch the heart and light the flame
    Of wonder in those eyes which first awoke
    To beauty and the sea's adventurous dream
    Three hundred years ago, three hundred years,
    And five long decades, in the leafy lanes
    Of Devon, where the tallest trees that bore
    The raven's matted nest had yielded up
    Their booty, while the perilous branches swayed
    Beneath the boyish privateer, the king
    Of many young companions, Francis Drake;
    So hear me, and so help, for more than his
    My need is, even than when he first set sail
    Upon that wild adventure with three ships
    And three-score men from grey old Plymouth Sound,
    Not knowing if he went to life or death,
    Not caring greatly, so that he were true
    To his own sleepless and unfaltering soul
    Which could not choose but hear the ringing call
    Across the splendours of the Spanish Main
    From ever fading, ever new horizons,
    And shores beyond the sunset and the sea.

    Mother and sweetheart, England; from whose breast,
    With all the world before them, they went forth,
    Thy seamen, o'er the wide uncharted waste,
    Wider than that Ulysses roamed of old,
    Even as the wine-dark Mediterranean
    Is wider than some wave-relinquished pool
    Among its rocks, yet none the less explored
    To greater ends than all the pride of Greece
    And pomp of Rome achieved; if my poor song
    Now spread too wide a sail, forgive thy son
    And lover, for thy love was ever wont
    To lift men up in pride above themselves
    To do great deeds which of themselves alone
    They could not; thou hast led the unfaltering feet
    Of even thy meanest heroes down to death,
    Lifted poor knights to many a great emprise,
    Taught them high thoughts, and though they kept their souls
    Lowly as little children, bidden them lift
    Eyes unappalled by all the myriad stars
    That wheel around the great white throne of God.


BOOK I

    Now through the great doors of the Council-room
    Magnificently streamed in rich array
    The peers of England, regal of aspèct
    And grave. Their silence waited for the Queen:
    And even now she came; and through their midst,
    Low as they bowed, she passed without a smile
    And took her royal seat. A bodeful hush
    Of huge anticipation gripped all hearts,
    Compressed all brows, and loaded the broad noon
    With gathering thunder: none knew what the hour
    Might yet bring forth; but the dark fire of war
    Smouldered in every eye; for every day
    The Council met debating how to join
    Honour with peace, and every day new tales
    Of English wrongs received from the red hands
    Of that gigantic Empire, insolent
    Spain, spurred fiercer resentments up like steeds
    Revolting, on the curb, foaming for battle,
    In all men's minds, against whatever odds.
    On one side of the throne great Walsingham,
    A lion of England, couchant, watchful, calm,
    Was now the master of opinion: all
    Drew to him. Even the hunchback Burleigh smiled
    With half-ironic admiration now,
    As in the presence of the Queen they met
    Amid the sweeping splendours of her court,
    A cynic smile that seemed to say, "I, too,
    Would fain regain that forthright heart of fire;
    Yet statesmanship is but a smoother name
    For the superior cunning which ensures
    Victory." And the Queen, too, knowing her strength
    And weakness, though her woman's heart leaped out
    To courage, yet with woman's craft preferred
    The subtler strength of Burleigh; for she knew
    Mary of Scotland waited for that war
    To strike her in the side for Rome; she knew
    How many thousands lurked in England still
    Remembering Rome and bloody Mary's reign.
    France o'er a wall of bleeding Huguenots
    Watched for an hour to strike. Against all these
    What shield could England raise, this little isle,--
    Out-matched, outnumbered, perilously near
    Utter destruction?

                        So the long debate
    Proceeded.

                All at once there came a cry
    Along the streets and at the palace-gates
    And at the great doors of the Council-room!
    Then through the pikes and halberds a voice rose
    Imperative for entrance, and the guards
    Made way, and a strange whisper surged around,
    And through the peers of England thrilled the blood
    Of Agincourt as to the foot of the throne
    Came Leicester, for behind him as he came
    A seaman stumbled, travel-stained and torn,
    Crying for justice, and gasped out his tale.
    "The Spaniards," he moaned, "the Inquisition!
    They have taken all my comrades, all our crew,
    And flung them into dungeons: there they lie
    Waiting for England, waiting for their Queen!
    Will you not free them? I alone am left!
    All London is afire with it, for this
    Was one of your chief city merchant's ships--
    The _Pride of London_, one of Osborne's ships!
    But there is none to help them! I escaped
    With shrieks of torment ringing in these ears,
    The glare of torture-chambers in these eyes
    That see no faces anywhere but blind
    Blind faces, each a bruise of white that smiles
    In idiot agony, washed with sweat and blood,
    The face of some strange thing that once was man,
    And now can only turn from side to side
    Babbling like a child, with mouth agape,
    And crying for help where there is none to hear
    Save those black vizards in the furnace-glow,
    Moving like devils at their hellish trade...."
    He paused; his memory sickened, his brain swooned
    Back into that wild glare of obscene pain!
    Once more to his ears and nostrils horribly crept
    The hiss and smell of shrivelling human flesh!
    His dumb stare told the rest: his head sank down;
    He strove in agony
    With what all hideous words must leave untold;
    While Leicester vouched him, "This man's tale is true!"
    But like a gathering storm a low deep moan
    Of passion, like a tiger's, slowly crept
    From the grey lips of Walsingham. "My Queen,
    Will you not free them?"

                              Then Elizabeth,
    Whose name is one for ever with the name
    Of England, rose; and in her face the gleam
    Of justice that makes anger terrible
    Shone, and she stretched her glittering sceptre forth
    And spoke, with distant empires in her eyes.

    "My lords, this is the last cry they shall wring
    From English lips unheeded: we will have
    Such remedies for this as all the world
    Shall tremble at!"
                        And, on that night, while Drake
    Close in his London lodging lay concealed
    Until he knew if it were peace or war
    With Spain (for he had struck on the high seas
    At Spain; and well he knew if it were peace
    His blood would be made witness to that bond,
    And he must die a pirate's death or fly
    Westward once more), there all alone, he pored
    By a struggling rushlight o'er a well-thumbed chart
    Of magic islands in the enchanted seas,
    Dreaming, as boys and poets only dream
    With those that see God's wonders in the deep,
    Perilous visions of those palmy keys,
    Cocoa-nut islands, parrot-haunted woods,
    Crisp coral reefs and blue shark-finned lagoons
    Fringed with the creaming foam, mile upon mile
    Of mystery. Dream after dream went by,
    Colouring the brown air of that London night
    With many a mad miraculous romance.

    There, suddenly, some augury, some flash
    Showed him a coming promise, a strange hint,
    Which, though he played with it, he scarce believed;
    Strange as in some dark cave the first fierce gleam
    Of pirate gold to some forlorn maroon
    Who tiptoes to the heap and glances round
    Askance, and dreads to hear what erst he longed
    To hear--some voice to break the hush; but bathes
    Both hands with childish laughter in the gold,
    And lets it trickle through his fevered palms,
    And begins counting half a hundred times
    And loses count each time for sheer delight
    And wonder in it; meantime, if he knew,
    Passing the cave-mouth, far away, beyond
    The still lagoon, the coral reef, the foam
    And the white fluttering chatter of the birds,
    A sail that might have saved him comes and goes
    Unseen across the blue Pacific sea.
    So Drake, too, played with fancies; but that sail
    Passed not unseen, for suddenly there came
    A firm and heavy footstep to the door,
    Then a loud knocking: and, at first, he thought
    "I am a dead man: there is peace with Spain,
    And they are come to lead me to my doom."
    But, as he looked across one shoulder, pride
    Checking the fuller watch for what he feared,
    The door opened; and cold as from the sea
    The night rushed in, and there against the gloom,
    Clad, as it seemed, with wind and cloud and rain,
    There loomed a stately form and high grim face
    Loaded with deadly thoughts of iron war--
    Walsingham,--in one hand he held a map
    Marked with red lines; the other hand held down
    The rich encrusted hilt of his great sword.
    Then Drake rose, and the other cautiously
    Closing the door drew near the flickering light
    And spread his map out on the table, saying--
    "Mark for me here the points whereat the King
    Philip of Spain may best be wounded, mark
    The joints of his harness;" and Drake looked at him
    Thinking, "If he betray me, I am dead."

    But the soldier met his eyes and, with a laugh,
    Drake, quivering like a bloodhound in the leash,
    Stooped, with his finger pointing thus and thus--
    "Here would I guard, here would I lie in wait,
    Here would I strike him through the breast and throat."
    And as he spoke he kindled, and began
    To set forth his great dreams, and high romance
    Rose like a moon reflecting the true sun
    Unseen; and as the full round moon indeed
    Rising behind a mighty mountain-chain
    Will shadow forth in outline grim and black
    Its vast and ragged edges, so that moon
    Of high romance rose greatly shadowing forth
    The grandeur of his dreams, until their might
    Dawned upon Walsingham, and he, too, saw
    For a moment of muffled moonlight and wild cloud
    The vision of the imperious years to be!
    But suddenly Drake paused as one who strays
    Beyond the bounds of caution, paused and cursed
    His tongue for prating like a moon-struck boy's.
    "I am mad," he cried, "I am mad to babble so!"
    Then Walsingham drew near him with strange eyes
    And muttered slowly, "Write that madness down;
    Ay, write it down, that madman's plan of thine;
    Sign it, and let me take it to the Queen."
    But the weather-wiser seaman warily
    Answered him, "If it please Almighty God
    To take away our Queen Elizabeth,
    Seeing that she is mortal as ourselves,
    England might then be leagued with Spain, and I
    Should here have sealed my doom. I will not put
    My pen to paper."
                       So, across the charts
    With that dim light on each grim countenance
    The seaman and the courtier subtly fenced
    With words and thoughts, but neither would betray
    His whole heart to the other. At the last
    Walsingham gripped the hand of Francis Drake
    And left him wondering.

                             On the third night came
    A messenger from Walsingham who bade
    Drake to the Palace where, without one word,
    The statesman met him in an anteroom
    And led him, with flushed cheek and beating heart,
    Along a mighty gold-gloomed corridor
    Into a high-arched chamber, hung with tall
    Curtains of gold-fringed silk and tapestries
    From Flanders looms, whereon were flowers and beasts
    And forest-work, great knights, with hawk on hand,
    Riding for ever on their glimmering steeds
    Through bowery glades to some immortal face
    Beyond the fairy fringes of the world.
    A silver lamp swung softly overhead,
    Fed with some perfumed oil that shed abroad
    Delicious light and fragrances as rare
    As those that stirred faint wings at eventide
    Through the King's House in Lebanon of old.
    Into a quietness as of fallen bloom
    Their feet sank in that chamber; and, all round,
    Soft hills of Moorish cushions dimly drowsed
    On glimmering crimson couches. Near the lamp
    An ebony chess-board stood inlaid with squares
    Of ruby and emerald, garnished with cinquefoils
    Of silver, bears and ragged staves; the men,
    Likewise of precious stones, were all arrayed--
    Bishops and knights and elephants and pawns--
    As for a game. Sixteen of them were set
    In silver white, the other sixteen gilt.
    Now, as Drake gazed upon an arras, nigh
    The farther doors, whereon was richly wrought
    The picture of that grave and lovely queen
    Penelope, with cold hands weaving still
    The unending web, while in an outer court
    The broad-limbed wooers basking in the sun
    On purple fleeces took from white-armed girls,
    Up-kirtled to the knee, the crimson wine;
    There, as he gazed and thought, "Is this not like
    Our Queen Elizabeth who waits and weaves,
    Penelope of England, her dark web
    Unendingly till England's Empire come;"
    There, as he gazed, for a moment, he could vow
    The pictured arras moved. Well had it been
    Had he drawn sword and pierced it through and through;
    But he suspected nothing and said nought
    To Walsingham; for thereupon they heard
    The sound of a low lute and a sweet voice
    Carolling like a gold-caged nightingale,
    Caught by the fowlers ere he found his mate,
    And singing all his heart out evermore
    To the unknown forest-love he ne'er should see.
    And Walsingham smiled sadly to himself,
    Knowing the weary queen had bidden some maid
    Sing to her, even as David sang to Saul;
    Since all her heart was bitter with her love
    Or so it was breathed (and there the chess-board stood,
    Her love's device upon it), though she still,
    For England's sake, must keep great foreign kings
    Her suitors, wedding no man till she died.
    Nor did she know how, in her happiest hour
    Remembered now most sorrowfully, the moon,
    Vicegerent of the sky, through summer dews,
    As that sweet ballad tells in plaintive rhyme,
    Silvering the grey old Cumnor towers and all
    The hollow haunted oaks that grew thereby,
    Gleamed on a casement whence the pure white face
    Of Amy Robsart, wife of Leicester, wife
    Unknown of the Queen's lover, a frail bar
    To that proud Earl's ambition, quietly gazed
    And heard the night-owl hoot a dark presage
    Of murder through her timid shuddering heart.
    But of that deed Elizabeth knew nought;
    Nay, white as Amy Robsart in her dream
    Of love she listened to the sobbing lute,
    Bitterly happy, proudly desolate;
    So heavy are all earth's crowns and sharp with thorns!
    But tenderly that high-born maiden sang.


SONG

    _Now the purple night is past,
      Now the moon more faintly glows,
    Dawn has through thy casement cast
      Roses on thy breast, a rose;
    Now the kisses are all done,
      Now the world awakes anew,
    Now the charmed hour is gone,
      Let not love go, too._

    _When old winter, creeping nigh,
      Sprinkles raven hair with white,
    Dims the brightly glancing eye,
      Laughs away the dancing light,
    Roses may forget their sun,
      Lilies may forget their dew,
    Beauties perish, one by one,
      Let not love go, too._

    _Palaces and towers of pride
      Crumble year by year away;
    Creeds like robes are laid aside,
      Even our very tombs decay!
    When the all-conquering moth and rust
      Gnaw the goodly garment through,
    When the dust returns to dust,
      Let not love go, too._

    _Kingdoms melt away like snow,
      Gods are spent like wasting flames,
    Hardly the new peoples know
      Their divine thrice-worshipped names!
    At the last great hour of all,
      When thou makest all things new,
    Father, hear Thy children call,
      Let not love go, too._

    The song ceased: all was still; and now it seemed
    Power brooded on the silence, and Drake saw
    A woman come to meet him,--tall and pale
    And proud she seemed: behind her head two wings
    As of some mighty phantom butterfly
    Glimmered with jewel-sparks in the gold gloom.
    Her small, pure, grey-eyed face above her ruff
    Was chiselled like an agate; and he knew
    It was the Queen. Low bent he o'er her hand;
    And "Ah," she said, "Sir Francis Walsingham
    Hath told me what an English heart beats here!
    Know you what injuries the King of Spain
    Hath done us?" Drake looked up at her: she smiled,
    "We find you apt! Will you not be our knight
    For we are helpless"--witchingly she smiled--
    "We are not ripe for war; our policy
    Must still be to uphold the velvet cloak
    Of peace; but I would have it mask the hand
    That holds the dagger! Will you not unfold
    Your scheme to us?" And then with a low bow
    Walsingham, at a signal from the Queen,
    Withdrew; and she looked down at Drake and smiled;
    And in his great simplicity the man
    Spake all his heart out like some youthful knight
    Before his Gloriana: his heart burned,
    Knowing he talked with England, face to face;
    And suddenly the Queen bent down to him,
    England bent down to him, and his heart reeled
    With the beauty of her presence--for indeed
    Women alone have royal power like this
    Within their very selves enthroned and shrined
    To draw men's hearts out! Royal she bent down
    And touched his hand for a moment. "Friend," she said,
    Looking into his face with subtle eyes,
    "I have searched thy soul to-night and know full well
    How I can trust thee! Canst thou think that I,
    The daughter of my royal father, lack
    The fire which every boor in England feels
    Burning within him as the bloody score
    Which Spain writes on the flesh of Englishmen
    Mounts higher day by day? Am I not Tudor?
    I am not deaf or blind; nor yet a king!
    I am a woman and a queen, and where
    Kings would have plunged into their red revenge
    Or set their throne up on this temporal shore,
    As flatterers bade that wiser king Canúte,
    Thence to command the advancing tides of battle
    Till one ensanguined sea whelm throne and king
    And kingdom, friend, I take my woman's way,
    Smile in mine enemies' faces with a heart
    All hell, and undermine them hour by hour!
    This island scarce can fend herself from France,
    And now Spain holds the keys of all the world,
    How should we fight her, save that my poor wit
    Hath won the key to Philip? Oh, I know
    His treacherous lecherous heart, and hour by hour
    My nets are drawing round him. I, that starve
    My public armies, feed his private foes,
    Nourish his rebels in the Netherlands,
    Nay, sacrifice mine own poor woman's heart
    To keep him mine, and surely now stands Fate
    With hand uplifted by the doors of Spain
    Ready to knock: the time is close at hand
    When I shall strike, once, and no second stroke.
    Remember, friend, though kings have fought for her,
    This England, with the trident in her grasp,
    Was ever woman; and she waits her throne;
    And thou canst speed it. Furnish thee with ships,
    Gather thy gentleman adventurers,
    And be assured thy parsimonious queen--
    Oh ay, she knows that chattering of the world--
    Will find thee wealth enough. Then put to sea,
    Fly the black flag of piracy awhile
    Against these blackest foes of all mankind.
    Nay; what hast thou to do with piracy?
    _Hostis humani generis_ indeed
    Is Spain: she dwells beyond the bounds of law;
    Thine is no piracy, whate'er men say,
    Thou art a knight on Gloriana's quest.
    Oh, lay that golden unction to thy soul,
    This is no piracy, but glorious war,
    Waged for thy country and for all mankind,
    Therefore put out to sea without one fear,
    Ransack their El Dorados of the West,
    Pillage their golden galleons, sap their strength
    Even at its utmost fountains; let them know
    That there is blood, not water, in our veins.
    Sail on, my captain, to the glorious end,
    And, though at first thou needs must sail alone
    And undefended, ere that end be reached,
    When I shall give the word, nay, but one word,
    All England shall be up and after thee,
    The sword of England shall shine over thee,
    And round about thee like a guardian fire;
    All the great soul of England shall be there;
    Her mighty dead shall at that cry of doom
    Rise from their graves and in God's panoply
    Plunge with our standards through immortal storms
    When Drake rides out across the wreck of Rome.
    As yet we must be cautious; let no breath
    Escape thee, save to thy most trusted friends;
    For now, if my lord Burleigh heard one word
    Of all thou hast in mind, he is so much
    The friend of caution and the beaten road,
    He would not rest till he had spilled thy hopes
    And sealed thy doom! Go now, fit out thy ships.
    Walsingham is empowered to give thee gold
    Immediately, but look to him for more
    As thou shalt need it, gold and gold to spare,
    My golden-hearted pilot to the shores
    Of victory--so farewell;" and through the gloom
    She vanished as she came; and Drake groped, dazed,
    Out through the doors, and found great Walsingham
    Awaiting him with gold.
                             But in the room
    Where Drake had held his converse with the Queen
    The embroidered arras moved, and a lean face,
    White with its long eavesdropping upon death,
    Crept out and peered as a venomous adder peers
    From out dark ferns, then as the reptile flashes
    Along a path between two banks of flowers
    Almost too swift for sight, a stealthy form
    --One of the fifty spies whom Burleigh paid--
    Passed down the gold-gloomed corridor to seek
    His master, whom among great books he found,
    Calm, like a mountain brooding o'er the sea.
    Nor did he break that calm for all these winds
    Of rumour that now burst from out the sky.
    His brow bent like a cliff over his thoughts,
    And the spy watched him half resentfully,
    Thinking his news well worth a blacker frown.
    At last the statesman smiled and answered, "Go;
    Fetch Thomas Doughty, Leicester's secretary."

    Few suns had risen and set ere Francis Drake
    Had furnished forth his ships with guns and men,
    Tried seamen that he knew in storms of old,--
    Will Harvest, who could haul the ropes and fight
    All day, and sing a foc'sle song to cheer
    Sea-weary hearts at night; brave old Tom Moone
    The carpenter, whose faithful soul looked up
    To Drake's large mastery with a mastiff's eyes;
    And three-score trusty mariners, all scarred
    And weather-beaten. After these there came
    Some two-score gentleman adventurers,
    Gay college lads or lawyers that had grown
    Sick of the dusty Temple, and were fired
    With tales of the rich Indies and those tall
    Enchanted galleons drifting through the West,
    Laden with ingots and broad bars of gold.
    Already some had bought at a great price
    Green birds of Guatemala, which they wore
    On their slouched hats, tasting the high romance
    And new-found colours of the world like wine.
    By night they gathered in a marvellous inn
    Beside the black and secret flowing Thames;
    And joyously they tossed the magic phrase
    "Pieces of eight" from mouth to mouth, and laughed
    And held the red wine up, night after night,
    Around their tables, toasting Francis Drake.
    Among these came a courtier, and none knew
    Or asked by whose approval, for each thought
    Some other brought him; yet he made his way
    Cautiously, being a man with a smooth tongue,
    The secretary of Leicester; and his name
    Was Thomas Doughty. Most of all with Drake
    He won his way to friendship, till at last
    There seemed one heart between them and one soul.


BOOK II

    So on a misty grey December morn
    Five ships put out from calm old Plymouth Sound;
    Five little ships, the largest not so large
    As many a coasting yacht or fishing-trawl
    To-day; yet these must brave uncharted seas
    Of unimagined terrors, haunted glooms,
    And shadowy horrors of an unknown world
    Wild as primeval chaos. In the first,
    The _Golden Hynde_, a ship of eighteen guns,
    Drake sailed: John Wynter, a queen's captain, next
    Brought out the _Elizabeth_, a stout new ship
    Of sixteen guns. The pinnace _Christopher_
    Came next, in staunch command of old Tom Moone
    Who, five years back, with reeking powder grimed,
    Off Cartagena fought against the stars
    All night, and, as the sun arose in blood,
    Knee-deep in blood and brine, stood in the dark
    Perilous hold and scuttled his own ship
    The _Swan_, bidding her down to God's great deep
    Rather than yield her up a prize to Spain.
    Lastly two gentleman-adventurers
    Brought out the new _Swan_ and the _Marygold_.
    Their crews, all told, were eight score men and boys.
    Not only terrors of the deep they braved,
    Bodiless witchcrafts of the black abyss,
    Red gaping mouths of hell and gulfs of fire
    That yawned for all who passed the tropic line;
    But death lurked round them from their setting forth.
    Mendoza, plenipotentiary of Spain,
    By spies informed, had swiftly warned his king,
    Who sent out mandates through his huge empire
    From Gaudalchiber to the golden West
    For the instant sinking of all English ships
    And the instant execution of their crews
    Who durst appear in the Caribbean sea.
    Moreover, in the pith of their emprise
    A peril lurked--Burleigh's emissaries,
    The smooth-tongued Thomas Doughty, who had brought
    His brother--unacquitted of that charge
    Of poisoning, raised against him by the friends
    Of Essex, but in luckless time released
    Lately for lack of proof, on no strong plea.
    These two wound through them like two snakes at ease
    In Eden, waiting for their venomous hour.
    Especially did Thomas Doughty toil
    With soft and flowery tongue to win his way;
    And Drake, whose rich imagination craved
    For something more than simple seaman's talk,
    Was marvellously drawn to this new friend
    Who with the scholar's mind, the courtier's gloss,
    The lawyer's wit, the adventurer's romance,
    Gold honey from the blooms of Euphues,
    Rare flashes from the _Mermaid_ and sweet smiles
    Copied from Sidney's self, even to the glance
    Of sudden, liquid sympathy, gave Drake
    That banquet of the soul he ne'er had known
    Nor needed till he knew, but needed now.
    So to the light of Doughty's answering eyes
    He poured his inmost thoughts out, hour by hour;
    And Doughty coiled up in the heart of Drake.

    Against such odds the tiny fleet set sail;
    Yet gallantly and with heroic pride,
    Escutcheoned pavisades, emblazoned poops,
    Banners and painted shields and close-fights hung
    With scarlet broideries. Every polished gun
    Grinned through the jaws of some heraldic beast,
    Gilded and carven and gleaming with all hues;
    While in the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_
    Rich perfumes floated, given by the great Queen
    Herself to Drake as Captain-General;
    So that it seemed her soul was with the fleet,
    A presence to remind him, far away,
    Of how he talked with England, face to face,--
    No pirate he, but Gloriana's knight.
    Silver and gold his table furniture,
    Engraved and richly chased, lavishly gleamed
    While, fanned by favouring airs, the ships advanced
    With streaming flags and ensigns and sweet chords
    Of music struck by skilled musicians
    Whom Drake brought with him, not from vanity,
    But knowing how the pulse of men beats high
    To music; and the hearts of men like these
    Were open to the high romance of earth,
    And they that dwelt so near God's mystery
    Were proud of their own manhood. They went out
    To danger, as to a sweetheart, far away.

    Light as the sea-birds dipping their white wings
    In foam before the gently heaving prows
    Each heart beat, while the low soft lapping splash
    Of water racing past them ripped and tore
    Whiter and faster, and the bellying sails
    Filled out, and the chalk cliffs of England sank
    Dwindling behind the broad grey plains of sea.
    Meekly content and tamely stay-at-home
    The sea-birds seemed that piped across the waves;
    And Drake, be-mused, leaned smiling to his friend
    Doughty and said, "Is it not strange to know
    When we return yon speckled herring-gulls
    Will still be wheeling, dipping, flashing there?
    We shall not find a fairer land afar
    Than those thyme-scented hills we leave behind!
    Soon the young lambs will bleat across the combes,
    And breezes will bring puffs of hawthorn scent
    Down Devon lanes; over the purple moors
    Lavrocks will carol; and on the village greens
    Around the May-pole, while the moon hangs low,
    The boys and girls of England merrily swing
    In country footing through the morrice dance.
    But many of us indeed shall not return."
    Then the other with a laugh, "Nay, like the man
    Who slept a hundred years we shall return
    And find our England strange: there are great storms
    Brewing; God only knows what we shall find--
    Perchance a Spanish king upon the throne!
    What then?" And Drake, "I should put down my helm,
    And out once more to the unknown golden West
    To die, as I have lived, in a free land."
    So said he, while the white cliffs dwindled down,
    Faded, and vanished; but the prosperous wind
    Carried the five ships onward over the swell
    Of swinging, sweeping seas, till the sun sank,
    And height o'er height the chaos of the skies
    Broke out into the miracle of the stars.
    Frostily glittering, all the Milky Way
    Lay bare like diamond-dust upon the robe
    Of some great king. Orion and the Plough
    Glimmered through drifting gulfs of silver fleece,
    And, far away, in Italy, that night
    Young Galileo, looking upward, heard
    The self-same whisper through that wild abyss
    Which now called Drake out to the unknown West.
    But, after supper, Drake came up on deck
    With Doughty, and on the cold poop as they leaned
    And gazed across the rolling gleam and gloom
    Of mighty muffled seas, began to give
    Voices to those lovely captives of the brain
    Which, like princesses in some forest-tower,
    Still yearn for the delivering prince, the sweet
    Far bugle-note that calls from answering minds.
    He told him how, in those dark days which now
    Seemed like an evil dream, when the Princess
    Elizabeth even trembled for her life
    And read there, by the gleam of Smithfield fires,
    Those cunning lessons of diplomacy
    Which saved her then and now for England's sake,
    He passed his youth. 'Twas when the power of Spain
    Began to light the gloom, with that great glare
    Of martyrdom which, while the stars endure,
    Bears witness how men overcame the world,
    Trod the red flames beneath their feet like flowers,
    And cast aside the blackening robe of flesh,
    While with a crown of joy upon their heads,
    Even as into a palace, they passed through
    The portals of the tomb to prove their love
    Stronger at least than death: and, in those days
    A Puritan, with iron in his soul,
    Having in earlier manhood occupied
    His business in great waters and beheld
    The bloody cowls of the Inquisition pass
    Before the midnight moon as he kept watch;
    And having then forsworn the steely sea
    To dwell at home in England with his love
    At Tavistock in Devon, Edmund Drake
    Began, albeit too near the Abbey walls,
    To speak too staunchly for his ancient faith;
    And with his young child Francis, had to flee
    By night at last for shelter to the coast.
    Little the boy remembered of that flight,
    Pillioned behind his father, save the clang
    And clatter of the hoofs on stony ground
    Striking a sharp blue fire, while country tales
    Of highwaymen kindled his reckless heart
    As the great steed went shouldering through the night.
    There Francis, laying a little sunburnt hand
    On the big bolstered pistol at each side,
    Dreamed with his wide grey eyes that he himself
    Was riding out on some freebooting quest,
    And felt himself heroic. League by league
    The magic world rolled past him as they rode,
    Leaving him nothing but a memory
    Of his own making. Vaguely he perceived
    A thousand meadows darkly streaming by
    With clouds of perfume from their secret flowers,
    A wayside cottage-window pointing out
    A golden finger o'er the purple road;
    A puff of garden roses or a waft
    Of honeysuckle blown along a wood,
    While overhead that silver ship, the moon,
    Sailed slowly down the gulfs of glittering stars,
    Till, at the last, a buffet of fresh wind
    Fierce with sharp savours of the stinging brine
    Against his dreaming face brought up a roar
    Of mystic welcome from the Channel seas.
    And there Drake paused for a moment, as a song
    Stole o'er the waters from the _Marygold_
    Where some musician, striking luscious chords
    Of sweet-stringed music, freed his heart's desire
    In symbols of the moment, which the rest,
    And Doughty among them, scarce could understand.


SONG

    _The moon is up: the stars are bright:
      The wind is fresh and free!
    We're out to seek for gold to-night
      Across the silver sea!
    The world was growing grey and old;
      Break out the sails again!
    We're out to seek a Realm of Gold
      Beyond the Spanish Main._

    _We're sick of all the cringing knees,
      The courtly smiles and lies.
    God, let Thy singing Channel breeze
      Lighten our hearts and eyes!
    Let love no more be bought and sold
      For earthly loss or gain.
    We're out to seek an Age of Gold
      Beyond the Spanish Main._

    _Beyond the light of far Cathay,
      Beyond all mortal dreams,
    Beyond the reach of night and day
      Our El Dorado gleams,
    Revealing--as the skies unfold--
      A star without a stain,
    The Glory of the Gates of Gold
      Beyond the Spanish Main._

    And, as the skilled musician made the words
    Of momentary meaning still simply
    His own eternal hope and heart's desire,
    Without belief, perchance, in Drake's own quest--
    To Drake's own greater mind the eternal glory
    Seemed to transfigure his immediate hope.
    But Doughty only heard a sweet concourse
    Of sounds. They ceased. And Drake resumed his tale
    Of that strange flight in boyhood to the sea.
    Next, the red-curtained inn and kindly hands
    Of Protestant Plymouth held his memory long;
    Often in strange and distant dreams he saw
    That scene which now he tenderly portrayed
    To Doughty's half-ironic smiling lips,
    Half-sympathetic eyes; he saw again
    That small inn parlour with the homely fare
    Set forth upon the table, saw the gang
    Of seamen dripping from the spray come in,
    Like great new thoughts to some adventurous brain.
    Feeding his wide grey eyes he saw them stand
    Around the crimson fire and stamp their feet
    And scatter the salt drops from their big sea-boots;
    And all that night he lay awake and heard
    Mysterious thunderings of eternal tides
    Moaning out of a cold and houseless gloom
    Beyond the world, that made it seem most sweet
    To slumber in a little four-walled inn
    Immune from all that vastness. But at dawn
    He woke, he leapt from bed, he ran and lookt,
    There, through the tiny high bright casement, there,--
    O, fairy vision of that small boy's face
    Peeping at daybreak through the diamond pane!--
    There first he saw the wondrous new-born world,
    And round its princely shoulders wildly flowing,
    Gemmed with a myriad clusters of the sun,
    The magic azure mantle of the sea.

    And, afterwards, there came those marvellous days
    When, on that battleship, a disused hulk
    Rotting to death in Chatham Reach, they found
    Sanctuary and a dwelling-place at last.
    For, Hawkins, that great ship-man, being their friend,
    A Protestant, with power on Plymouth town,
    Nigh half whereof he owned, made Edmund Drake
    Reader of prayer to all the ships of war
    That lay therein. So there the dreaming boy,
    Francis, grew up in that grim nursery
    Among the ropes and masts and great dumb mouths
    Of idle ordnance. In that hulk he heard
    Many a time his father and his friends
    Over some wild-eyed troop of refugees
    Thunder against the powers of Spain and Rome,
    "Idolaters who defiled the House of God
    In England;" and all round them, as he heard,
    The clang and clatter of shipwright hammers rang,
    And hour by hour upon his vision rose,
    In solid oak reality, new ships,
    As Ilion rose to music, ships of war,
    The visible shapes and symbols of his dream,
    Unconscious yet, but growing as they grew,
    A wondrous incarnation, hour by hour,
    Till with their towering masts they stood complete,
    Embodied thoughts, in God's own dockyards built,
    For Drake ere long to lead against the world.

    There, as to round the tale with ringing gold,
    Across the waters from the full-plumed _Swan_
    The music of a _Mermaid_ roundelay--
    _Our Lady of the Sea_, a Dorian theme
    Tuned to the soul of England--charmed the moon.


SONG


    I

    Queen Venus wandered away with a cry,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    For the purple wound in Adon's thigh;
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;
    With a bitter farewell from sky to sky,
            And a moan, a moan, from sea to sea;
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    II

    The soft Ægean heard her sigh,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    Heard the Spartan hills reply,
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;
    Spain was aware of her drawing nigh
            Foot-gilt from the blossoms of Italy;
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    III

    In France they heard her voice go by,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_
    --And on the May-wind droop and die,
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;
    Your maidens choose their loves, but I--
            White as I came from the foam-white sea,
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--


    IV

    The warm red-meal-winged butterfly,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    Beat on her breast in the golden rye,--
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me,--
    Stained her breast with a dusty dye
            Red as the print of a kiss might be!
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    V

    Is there no land, afar or nigh--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    But dreads the kiss o' the sea? Ah, why--
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me!--
    Why will ye cling to the loves that die?
            Is earth all Adon to my plea?
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    VI

    Under the warm blue summer sky,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_
    With outstretched arms and a low long sigh,--
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;--
    Over the Channel they saw her fly
            To the white-cliffed island that crowns the sea,
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    VII

    England laughed as her queen drew nigh,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_
    To the white-walled cottages gleaming high,
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me!
    They drew her in with a joyful cry
            To the hearth where she sits with a babe on her knee,
    She has turned her moan to a lullaby.
            She is nursing a son to the kings of the sea,
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_

    Such memories, on the plunging _Golden Hynde_,
    Under the stars, Drake drew before his friend,
    Clomb for a moment to that peak of vision,
    That purple peak of Darien, laughing aloud
    O'er those wild exploits down to Rio Grande
    Which even now had made his fierce renown
    Terrible to all lonely ships of Spain.
    E'en now, indeed, that poet of Portugal,
    Lope de Vega, filled with this new fear
    Began to meditate his epic muse
    Till, like a cry of panic from his lips,
    He shrilled the faint _Dragontea_ forth, wherein
    Drake is that Dragon of the Apocalypse,
    The dread Antagonist of God and Man.

    Well had it been for Doughty on that night
    Had he not heard what followed; for, indeed,
    When two minds clash, not often does the less
    Conquer the greater; but, without one thought
    Of evil, seeing they now were safe at sea,
    Drake told him, only somewhat, yet too much,
    Of that close conference with the Queen. And lo,
    The face of Doughty blanched with a slow thought
    That crept like a cold worm through all his brain,
    "Thus much I knew, though secretly, before;
    But here he freely tells me as his friend;
    If I be false and he be what they say,
    His knowledge of my knowledge will mean death."
    But Drake looked round at Doughty with a smile
    And said, "Forgive me now: thou art not used
    To these cold nights at sea! thou tremblest, friend;
    Let us go down and drink a cup of sack
    To our return!" And at that kindly smile
    Doughty shook off his nightmare mood, and thought,
    "The yard-arm is for dogs, not gentlemen!
    Even Drake would not misuse a man of birth!"
    And in the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_
    Revolving subtle treacheries he sat.
    There with the sugared phrases of the court
    Bartering beads for gold, he drew out all
    The simple Devon seaman's inmost heart,
    And coiled up in the soul of Francis Drake.
    There in the solemn night they interchanged
    Lies for sweet confidences. From one wall
    The picture of Drake's love looked down on him;
    And, like a bashful schoolboy's, that bronzed face
    Flushed as he blurted out with brightening eyes
    And quickening breath how he had seen her first,
    Crowned on the village green, a Queen of May.
    Her name, too, was Elizabeth, he said,
    As if it proved that she, too, was a queen,
    Though crowned with milk-white Devon may alone,
    And queen but of one plot of meadow-sweet.
    As yet, he said, he had only kissed her hand,
    Smiled in her eyes and--there Drake also flinched,
    Thinking, "I ne'er may see her face again."

    And Doughty comforted his own dark heart
    Thinking, "I need not fear so soft a soul
    As this"; and yet, he wondered how the man,
    Seeing his love so gripped him, none the less
    Could leave her, thus to follow after dreams;
    For faith to Doughty was an unknown word,
    And trustfulness the property of fools.
    At length they parted, each to his own couch,
    Doughty with half a chuckle, Francis Drake
    With one old-fashioned richly grateful prayer
    Blessing all those he loved, as he had learnt
    Beside his mother's knee in Devon days.

    So all night long they sailed; but when a rift
    Of orchard crimson broke the yellowing gloom
    And barred the closely clouded East with dawn,
    Behold, a giant galleon, overhead,
    Lifting its huge black shining sides on high,
    Loomed like some misty monster of the deep:
    And, sullenly rolling out great gorgeous folds,
    Over her rumbled like a thunder-cloud
    The heavy flag of Spain. The splendid poop,
    Mistily lustrous as a dragon's hoard
    Seen in some magic cave-mouth o'er the sea
    Through shimmering April sunlight after rain,
    Blazed to the morning; and her port-holes grinned
    With row on row of cannon. There at once
    One sharp shrill whistle sounded, and those five
    Small ships, mere minnows clinging to the flanks
    Of that Leviathan, unseen, unheard,
    Undreamt of, grappled her. She seemed asleep,
    Swinging at ease with great half-slackened sails,
    Majestically careless of the dawn.
    There in the very native seas of Spain,
    There with the yeast and foam of her proud cliffs,
    Her own blue coasts, in sight across the waves,
    Up her Titanic sides without a sound
    The naked-footed British seamen swarmed
    With knives between their teeth: then on her decks
    They dropped like panthers, and the softly fierce
    Black-bearded watch, of Spaniards, all amazed,
    Rubbing their eyes as if at a wild dream,
    Upraised a sudden shout, _El Draque! El Draque!_
    And flashed their weapons out, but all too late;
    For, ere their sleeping comrades reached the deck,
    The little watch, out-numbered and out-matched,
    Lay bound, and o'er the hatches everywhere
    The points of naked cutlasses on guard
    Gleamed, and without a struggle those below
    Gave up their arms, their poignards jewelled thick
    With rubies, and their blades of Spanish steel.

    Then onward o'er the great grey gleaming sea
    They swept with their rich booty, night and day.
    Five other prizes, one for every ship,
    Out of the seas of Spain they suddenly caught
    And carried with them, laughing as they went--
    "Now, now indeed the Rubicon is crossed;
    Now have we singed the eyelids and the beard
    Of Spain; now have we roused the hornet's nest;
    Now shall we sail against a world in arms;
    Now we have nought between us and black death
    But our own hands, five ships, and three score guns."
    So laughed they, plunging through the bay of storms,
    Biscay, and past Gibraltar, not yet clothed
    With British thunder, though, as one might dream,
    Gazing in dim prophetic grandeur out
    Across the waves while that small fleet went by,
    Or watching them with love's most wistful fear
    As they plunged Southward to the lonely coasts
    Of Africa, till right in front up-soared,
    Tremendous over ocean, Teneriffe,
    Cloud-robed, but crowned with colours of the dawn.

    Already those two traitors were at work,
    Doughty and his false brother, among the crews,
    Who knew not yet the vastness of their quest,
    Nor dreamed of aught beyond the accustomed world;
    For Drake had kept it secret, and the thoughts
    Of some that he had shipped before the mast
    Set sail scarce farther than for Mogadore
    In West Morocco, or at the utmost mark
    For northern Egypt, by the midnight woods
    And crystal palace roofed with chrysoprase
    Where Prester John had reigned five hundred years,
    And Sydon, river of jewels, through the dark
    Enchanted gorges rolled its rays along!
    Some thought of Rio Grande; but scarce to ten
    The true intent was known; while to divert
    The rest from care the skilled musicians played.
    But those two Doughtys cunningly devised
    By chance-dropt words to breathe a hint abroad;
    And through the foc'sles crept a grisly fear
    Of things that lay beyond the bourne of earth,
    Till even those hardy seamen almost quailed;
    And now, at any whisper, they might turn
    With terror in their eyes. They might refuse
    To sail into that fabled burning Void
    Or brave that _primum mobile_ which drew
    O'er-daring ships into the jaws of hell
    Beyond the Pole Antarticke, where the sea
    Rushed down through fiery mountains, and no sail
    Could e'er return against its roaring stream.

    Now down the coast of Barbary they cruised
    Till Christmas Eve embraced them in the heart
    Of summer. In a bay of mellow calm
    They moored, and as the fragrant twilight brought
    The stars, the sound of song and dance arose;
    And down the shores in stealthy silence crept,
    Out of the massy forest's emerald gloom,
    The naked, dark-limbed children of the night,
    Unseen, to gaze upon the floating glare
    Of revelry; unheard, to hear that strange
    New music of the gods, where o'er the soft
    Ripple and wash of the lanthorn-crimsoned tide
    Will Harvest's voice above the chorus rang.


SONG

    _In Devonshire, now, the Christmas chime
        Is carolling over the lea;
    And the sexton shovels away the snow
        From the old church porch, maybe;
    And the waifs with their lanthorns and noses a-glow
        Come round for their Christmas fee;
    But, as in old England it's Christmas-time,
        Why, so is it here at sea,
          My lads,
        Why, so is it here at sea!_

    _When the ship comes home, from turret to poop
        Filled full with Spanish gold,
    There'll be many a country dance and joke,
        And many a tale to be told;
    Every old woman shall have a red cloak
        To fend her against the cold;
    And every old man shall have a big round stoup
        Of jolly good ale and old,
          My lads,
        Jolly good ale and old!_

    But on the morrow came a prosperous wind
    Whereof they took advantage, and shook out
    The flashing sails, and held their Christmas feast
    Upon the swirling ridges of the sea:
    And, sweeping Southward with full many a rouse
    And shout of laughter, at the fall of day,
    While the black prows drove, leapt, and plunged, and ploughed
    Through the broad dazzle of sunset-coloured tides,
    Outside the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_,
    Where Drake and his chief captains dined in state,
    The skilled musicians made a great new song.


SONG


    I

    _Happy by the hearth sit the lasses and the lads, now,
      Roasting of their chestnuts, toasting of their toes!
    When the door is opened to a blithe new-comer,
      Stamping like a ploughman to shuffle off the snows;
    Rosy flower-like faces through the soft red firelight
      Float as if to greet us, far away at sea,
    Sigh as they remember, and turn the sigh to laughter,
      Kiss beneath the mistletoe and wonder at their glee.
            With their "heigh ho, the holly!
            This life is most jolly!"
          Christmas-time is kissing-time,
            Away with melancholy!_


    II

    _Ah, the Yule of England, the happy Yule of England,
      Yule of berried holly and the merry mistletoe;
    The boar's head, the brown ale, the blue snapdragon,
      Yule of groaning tables and the crimson log aglow!
    Yule, the golden bugle to the scattered old companions,
      Ringing as with laughter, shining as through tears!
    Loved of little children, oh guard the holy Yuletide.
      Guard it, men of England, for the child beyond the years.
            With its "heigh ho, the holly!"
            Away with melancholy!
          Christmas-time is kissing-time,
            "This life is most jolly!_"

    Now to the Fortunate Islands of old time
    They came, and found no glory as of old
    Encircling them, no red ineffable calm
    Of sunset round crowned faces pale with bliss
    Like evening stars. Rugged and desolate
    Those isles were when they neared them, though afar
    They beautifully smouldered in the sun
    Like dusky purple jewels fringed and frayed
    With silver foam across that ancient sea.
    Of wonder. On the largest of the seven
    Drake landed Doughty with his musketeers
    To exercise their weapons and to seek
    Supplies among the matted uncouth huts
    Which, as the ships drew round each ragged cliff,
    Crept like remembered misery into sight;
    Oh, like the strange dull waking from a dream
    They blotted out the rosy courts and fair
    Imagined marble thresholds of the King
    Achilles and the heroes that were gone.
    But Drake cared nought for these things. Such a heart
    He had, to make each utmost ancient bourne
    Of man's imagination but a point
    Of new departure for his Golden Dream.
    But Doughty with his men ashore, alone,
    Among the sparse wind-bitten groves of palm,
    Kindled their fears of all they must endure
    On that immense adventure. Nay, sometimes
    He hinted of a voyage far beyond
    All history and fable, far beyond
    Even that Void whence only two returned,--
    Columbus, with his men in mutiny;
    Magellan, who could only hound his crew
    Onward by threats of death, until they turned
    In horror from the Threat that lay before,
    Preferring to be hanged as mutineers
    Rather than venture farther. Nor indeed
    Did even Magellan at the last return;
    But, with all hell around him, in the clutch
    Of devils died upon some savage isle
    By poisonous black enchantment. Not in vain
    Were Doughty's words on that volcanic shore
    Among the stunted dark acacia trees,
    Whose heads, all bent one way by the trade-wind,
    Pointed North-east by North, South-west by West
    Ambiguous sibyls that with wizened arms
    Mysteriously declared a twofold path,
    Homeward or onward. But aboard the ships,
    Among the hardier seamen, old Tom Moone,
    With one or two stout comrades, overbore
    All doubts and questionings with blither tales
    Of how they sailed to Darien and heard
    Nightingales in November all night long
    As down a coast like Paradise they cruised
    Through seas of lasting summer, Eden isles,
    Where birds like rainbows, butterflies like gems,
    And flowers like coloured fires o'er fairy creeks
    Floated and flashed beneath the shadowy palms;
    While ever and anon a bark canoe
    With naked Indian maidens flower-festooned
    Put out from shadowy coves, laden with fruit
    Ambrosial o'er the silken shimmering sea.
    And once a troop of nut-brown maidens came--
    So said Tom Moone, a twinkle in his eye--
    Swimming to meet them through the warm blue waves
    And wantoned through the water, like those nymphs
    Which one green April at the Mermaid Inn
    Should hear Kit Marlowe mightily portray,
    Among his boon companions, in a song
    Of Love that swam the sparkling Hellespont
    Upheld by nymphs, not lovelier than these,--
    Though whiter yet not lovelier than these--
    For those like flowers, but these like rounded fruit
    Rosily ripening through the clear tides tossed
    From nut-brown breast and arm all round the ship
    The thousand-coloured spray. Shapely of limb
    They were; but as they laid their small brown hands
    Upon the ropes we cast them, Captain Drake
    Suddenly thundered at them and bade them pack
    For a troop of naughty wenches! At that tale
    A tempest of fierce laughter rolled around
    The foc'sle; but one boy from London town,
    A pale-faced prentice, run-away to sea,
    Asking why Drake had bidden them pack so soon,
    Tom Moone turned to him with his deep-sea growl,
    "Because our Captain is no pink-eyed boy
    Nor soft-limbed Spaniard, but a staunch-souled Man,
    Full-blooded; nerved like iron; with a girl
    He loves at home in Devon; and a mind
    For ever bent upon some mighty goal,
    I know not what--but 'tis enough for me
    To know my Captain knows." And then he told
    How sometimes o'er the gorgeous forest gloom
    Some marble city, rich, mysterious, white,
    An ancient treasure-house of Aztec kings,
    Or palace of forgotten Incas gleamed;
    And in their dim rich lofty cellars gold,
    Beyond all wildest dreams, great bars of gold,
    Like pillars, tossed in mighty chaos, gold
    And precious stones, agate and emerald,
    Diamond, sapphire, ruby, and sardonyx.
    So said he, as they waited the return
    Of Doughty, resting in the foc'sle gloom,
    Or idly couched about the sun-swept decks
    On sails or coils of rope, while overhead
    Some boy would climb the rigging and look out,
    Arching his hand to see if Doughty came.
    But when he came, he came with a strange face
    Of feigned despair; and with a stammering tongue
    He vowed he could not find those poor supplies
    Which Drake himself in other days had found
    Upon that self-same island. But, perchance,
    This was a barren year, he said. And Drake
    Looked at him, suddenly, and at the musketeers.
    Their eyes were strained; their faces wore a cloud.
    That night he said no more; but on the morn,
    Mistrusting nothing, Drake with subtle sense
    Of weather-wisdom, through that little fleet
    Distributed his crews anew. And all
    The prisoners and the prizes at those isles
    They left behind them, taking what they would
    From out their carven cabins,--glimmering silks,
    Chiselled Toledo blades, and broad doubloons.
    And lo, as they weighed anchor, far away
    Behind them on the blue horizon line
    It seemed a city of towering masts arose;
    And from the crow's nest of the _Golden Hynde_
    A seaman cried, "By God; the hunt is up!"
    And like a tide of triumph through their veins
    The red rejoicing blood began to race
    As there they saw the avenging ships of Spain,
    Eight mighty galleons, nosing out their trail.
    And Drake growled, "Oh, my lads of Bideford,
    It cuts my heart to show the hounds our heels;
    But we must not emperil our great quest!
    Such fights as that must wait--as our reward
    When we return. Yet I will not put on
    One stitch of sail. So, lest they are not too slow
    To catch us, clear the decks. God, I would like
    To fight them!" So the little fleet advanced
    With decks all cleared and shotted guns and men
    Bare-armed beside them, hungering to be caught,
    And quite distracted from their former doubts;
    For danger, in that kind, they never feared.
    But soon the heavy Spaniards dropped behind;
    And not in vain had Thomas Doughty sown
    The seeds of doubt; for many a brow grew black
    With sullen-seeming care that erst was gay.
    But happily and in good time there came,
    Not from behind them now, but right in front,
    On the first sun-down of their quest renewed,
    Just as the sea grew dark around their ships,
    A chance that loosed heart-gnawing doubt in deeds.
    For through a mighty zone of golden haze
    Blotting the purple of the gathering night
    A galleon like a floating mountain moved
    To meet them, clad with sunset and with dreams.
    Her masts and spars immense in jewelled mist
    Shimmered: her rigging, like an emerald web
    Of golden spiders, tangled half the stars!
    Embodied sunset, dragging the soft sky
    O'er dazzled ocean, through the night she drew
    Out of the unknown lands; and round a prow
    That jutted like a moving promontory
    Over a cloven wilderness of foam,
    Upon a lofty blazoned scroll her name
    _San Salvador_ challenged obsequious isles
    Where'er she rode; who kneeling like dark slaves
    Before some great Sultàn must lavish forth
    From golden cornucopias, East and West,
    Red streams of rubies, cataracts of pearl.
    But, at a signal from their admiral, all
    Those five small ships lay silent in the gloom
    Which, just as if some god were on their side,
    Covered them in the dark troughs of the waves,
    Letting her pass to leeward. On she came,
    Blazing with lights, a City of the Sea,
    Belted with crowding towers and clouds of sail,
    And round her bows a long-drawn thunder rolled
    Splendid with foam; but ere she passed them by
    Drake gave the word, and with one crimson flash
    Two hundred yards of black and hidden sea
    Leaped into sight between them as the roar
    Of twenty British cannon shattered the night.
    Then after her they drove, like black sea-wolves
    Behind some royal high-branched stag of ten,
    Hanging upon those bleeding foam-flecked flanks,
    Leaping, snarling, worrying, as they went
    In full flight down the wind; for those light ships
    Much speedier than their huge antagonist,
    Keeping to windward, worked their will with her.
    In vain she burnt wild lights and strove to scan
    The darkening deep. Her musketeers in vain
    Provoked the crackling night with random fires:
    In vain her broadside bellowings burst at large
    As if the Gates of Erebus unrolled.
    For ever and anon the deep-sea gloom
    From some new quarter, like a dragon's mouth
    Opened and belched forth crimson flames and tore
    Her sides as if with iron claws unseen;
    Till, all at once, rough voices close at hand
    Out of the darkness thundered, "Grapple her!"
    And, falling on their knees, the Spaniards knew
    The Dragon of that red Apocalypse.
    There with one awful cry, _El Draque! El Draque_!
    They cast their weapons from them; for the moon
    Rose, eastward, and, against her rising, black
    Over the bloody bulwarks, Francis Drake,
    Grasping the great hilt of his naked sword,
    Towered for a moment to their startled eyes
    Through all the zenith like the King of Hell.
    Then he leaped down upon their shining decks,
    And after him swarmed and towered and leapt in haste
    A brawny band of three score Englishmen,
    Gigantic as they loomed against the sky
    And risen, it seemed, by miracle from the sea.
    So small were those five ships below the walls
    Of that huge floating mountain. Royally
    Drake, from the swart commander's trembling hands
    Took the surrendered sword, and bade his men
    Gather the fallen weapons on an heap,
    And placed a guard about them, while the moon
    Silvering the rolling seas for many a mile
    Glanced on the huddled Spaniards' rich attire,
    As like one picture of despair they grouped
    Under the splintered main-mast's creaking shrouds,
    And the great swinging shadows of the sails
    Mysteriously swept the gleaming decks;
    Where many a butt of useless cannon gloomed
    Along the accoutred bulwarks or upturned,
    As the ship wallowed in the heaving deep,
    Dumb mouths of empty menace to the stars.

    Then Drake appointed Doughty, with a guard,
    To sail the prize on to the next dim isle
    Where they might leave her, taking aught they would
    From out her carven cabins and rich holds.
    And Doughty's heart leaped in him as he thought,
    "I have my chance at last"; but Drake, who still
    Trusted the man, made surety doubly sure,
    And in his wary weather-wisdom sent
    --Even as a breathing type of friendship, sent--
    His brother, Thomas Drake, aboard the prize;
    But set his brother, his own flesh and blood,
    Beneath the man, as if to say, "I give
    My loyal friend dominion over me."
    So courteously he dealt with him; but he,
    Seeing his chance once more slipping away,
    Raged inwardly and, from his own false heart
    Imputing his own evil, he contrived
    A cunning charge that night; and when they came
    Next day, at noon, upon the destined isle,
    He suddenly spat the secret venom forth,
    With such fierce wrath in his defeated soul
    That he himself almost believed the charge.
    For when Drake stepped on the _San Salvador_
    To order all things duly about the prize,
    What booty they must keep and what let go,
    Doughty received him with a blustering voice
    Of red mock-righteous wrath, "Is this the way
    Englishmen play the pirate, Francis Drake?
    While thou wast dreaming of thy hero's crown--
    God save the mark!--thy brother, nay, thy spy,
    Must play the common pilferer, must convert
    The cargo to his uses, rob us all
    Of what we risked our necks to win: he wears
    The ransom of an emperor round his throat
    That might enrich us all. Who saw him wear
    That chain of rubies ere last night?"
                                           And Drake,
    "Answer him, brother;" and his brother smiled
    And answered, "Nay, I never wore this chain
    Before last night; but Doughty knows, indeed,
    For he was with me--and none else was there
    But Doughty--'tis my word against his word,
    That close on midnight we were summoned down
    To an English seaman who lay dying below
    Unknown to any of us, a prisoner
    In chains, that had been captured none knew where,
    For all his mind was far from Darien,
    And wandering evermore through Devon lanes
    At home; whom we released; and from his waist
    He took this hidden chain and gave it me,
    Begging me that if ever I returned
    To Bideford in Devon I would go
    With whatsoever wealth it might produce
    To his old mother who, with wrinkled hands
    In some small white-washed cottage o'er the sea,
    Where wall-flowers bloom in April, even now
    Is turning pages of the well-worn Book
    And praying for her son's return, nor knows
    That he lies cold upon the heaving main.
    But this he asked; and this in all good faith
    I swore to do; and even now he died,
    And hurrying hither from his side I clasped
    His chain of rubies round my neck awhile,
    In full sight of the sun. I have no more
    To say." Then up spoke Hatton's trumpeter:
    "But I have more to say. Last night I saw
    Doughty, but not in full sight of the sun,
    Nor once, nor twice, but three times at the least,
    Carrying chains of gold, clusters of gems,
    And whatsoever wealth he could convey
    Into his cabin and smuggle in smallest space."
    "Nay," Doughty stammered, mixing sneer and lie,
    Yet bolstering up his courage with the thought
    That being what courtiers called a gentleman
    He ranked above the rude sea-discipline,
    "Nay, they were free gifts from the Spanish crew
    Because I treated them with courtesy."
    Then bluff Will Harvest, "That perchance were true,
    For he hath been close closeted for hours
    With their chief officers, drinking their health
    In our own war-bought wine, while down below
    Their captured English seaman groaned his last."
    Then Drake, whose utter silence, with a sense
    Of infinite power and justice, ruled their hearts,
    Suddenly thundered--and the traitor blanched
    And quailed before him. "This my flesh and blood
    I placed beneath thee as my dearer self!
    But thou, in trampling on him, shalt not say
    I charged thy brother. Nay, thou chargest me!
    Against me only hast thou stirred this strife;
    And now, by God, shalt thou learn, once for all,
    That I, thy captain for this voyage, hold
    The supreme power of judgment in my hands.
    Get thee aboard my flagship! When I come
    I shall have more to say to thee; but thou,
    My brother, take this galleon in thy charge;
    For, as I see, she holdeth all the stores
    Which Doughty failed to find. She shall return
    With us to that New World from which she came.
    But now let these our prisoners all embark
    In yonder pinnace; let them all go free.
    I care not to be cumbered on my way
    Through dead Magellan's unattempted dream
    With chains and prisoners. In that Golden World
    Which means much more to me than I can speak,
    Much more, much more than I can speak or breathe,
    Being, behind whatever name it bears--
    Earthly Paradise, Island of the Saints,
    Cathay, or Zipangu, or Hy Brasil--
    The eternal symbol of my soul's desire,
    A sacred country shining on the sea,
    That Vision without which, the wise king said,
    A people perishes; in that place of hope,
    That Tirn'an Og, that land of lasting youth,
    Where whosoever sails with me shall drink
    Fountains of immortality and dwell
    Beyond the fear of death for evermore,
    There shall we see the dust of battle dance
    Everywhere in the sunbeam of God's peace!
    Oh, in the new Atlantis of my soul
    There are no captives: there the wind blows free;
    And, as in sleep, I have heard the marching song
    Of mighty peoples rising in the West,
    Wonderful cities that shall set their foot
    Upon the throat of all old tyrannies;
    And on the West wind I have heard a cry,
    The shoreless cry of the prophetic sea
    Heralding through that golden wilderness
    The Soul whose path our task is to make straight,
    Freedom, the last great Saviour of mankind.
    I know not what I know: these are wild words,
    Which, as the sun draws out earth's morning mists
    Over dim fields where careless cattle sleep,
    Some visionary Light, unknown, afar,
    Draws from my darkling soul. Why should we drag
    Thither this Old-World weight of utter gloom,
    Or with the ballast of these heavy hearts
    Make sail in sorrow for Pacific Seas?
    Let us leave chains and prisoners to Spain;
    But set these free to make their own way home!"
    So said he, groping blindly towards the truth,
    And heavy with the treason of his friend.
    His face was like a king's face as he spake,
    For sorrows that strike deep reveal the deep;
    And through the gateways of a raggèd wound
    Sometimes a god will drive his chariot wheels
    From some deep heaven within the hearts of men.
    Nevertheless, the immediate seamen there
    Knowing how great a ransom they might ask
    For some among their prisoners, men of wealth
    And high degree, scarce liked to free them thus;
    And only saw in Drake's conflicting moods
    The moment's whim. "For little will he care,"
    They muttered, "when we reach those fabled shores,
    Whether his cannon break their golden peace."
    Yet to his face they murmured not at all;
    Because his eyes compelled them like a law.
    So there they freed the prisoners and set sail
    Across the earth-shaking shoulders of the broad
    Atlantic, and the great grey slumbrous waves
    Triumphantly swelled up to meet the keels.


BOOK III

    Now in the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_
    At dusk, Drake sent for Doughty. From one wall
    The picture of his love looked down on him;
    And on the table lay the magic chart,
    Drawn on a buffalo horn, all small peaked isles,
    Dwarf promontories, tiny twisted creeks,
    And fairy harbours under elfin hills,
    With marvellous inscriptions lined in red,--
    As _Here is Gold_, or _Many Rubies Here_,
    Or _Ware Witch-crafte_, or _Here is Cannibals_.
    For in his great simplicity the man
    Delighted in it, with the adventurous heart
    Of boyhood poring o'er some well-thumbed tale
    On blue Twelfth Night beside the crimson fire;
    And o'er him, like a vision of a boy
    In his first knighthood when, upon some hill
    Washed by the silver fringes of the sea,
    Amidst the purple heather he lies and reads
    Of Arthur and Avilion, like a star
    His love's pure face looked down. There Doughty came,
    Half fearful, half defiant, with a crowd
    Of jostling half-excuses on his lips,
    And one dark swarm of adders in his heart.
    For now what light of chivalry remained
    In Doughty's mind was thickening with a plot,
    Subtler and deadlier than the serpent's first
    Attempt on our first sire in Eden bower.
    Drake, with a countenance open as the sun,
    Received him, saying: "Forgive me, friend, for I
    Was hasty with thee. I well nigh forgot
    Those large and liberal nights we two have passed
    In this old cabin, telling all our dreams
    And hopes, in friendship, o'er and o'er again.
    But Vicary, thy friend hath talked with me,
    And now--I understand. Thou shalt no more
    Be vexed with a divided mastership.
    Indeed, I trust thee, Doughty. Wilt thou not
    Be friends with me? For now in ample proof
    Thou shalt take charge of this my _Golden Hynde_
    In all things, save of seamanship, which rests
    With the ship's master under my command.
    But I myself will sail upon the prize."
    And with the word he gathered up the chart,
    Took down his lady's picture with a smile,
    Gripped Doughty's hand and left him, staring, sheer
    Bewildered with that magnanimity
    Of faith, throughout all shadows, in some light
    Unseen behind the shadows. Thus did Drake
    Give up his own fair cabin which he loved;
    Being, it seemed, a little travelling home,
    Fragrant with memories,--gave it, as he thought,
    In recompense to one whom he had wronged.
    For even as his mind must ever yearn
    To shores beyond the sunset, even so
    He yearned through all dark shadows to his friend,
    And with his greater nature striving still
    To comprehend the lesser, as the sky
    Embraces our low earth, he would adduce
    Justifications, thus: "These men of law
    Are trained to plead for any and every cause,
    To feign an indignation, or to prove
    The worse is better and that black is white!
    Small wonder that their passion goes astray:
    There is one prayer, one prayer for all of us--
    _Enter not into judgment with Thy servant!_"

    Yet as his boat pulled tow'rd the Spanish prize
    Leaving the _Golden Hynde_, far off he heard
    A voice that chilled him, as the voice of Fate
    Crying like some old Bellman through the world.


SONG

    _Yes; oh, yes; if any seek
      Laughter flown or lost delight,
    Glancing eye or rosy cheek,
      Love shall claim his own to-night!
    Say, hath any lost a friend?
          Yes; oh, yes!
          Let his distress
    In my ditty find its end.

    Yes; oh, yes; here all is found!
      Kingly palaces await
    Each its rightful owner, crowned
      King and consecrate,
    Under the wet and wintry ground!
          Yes; oh, yes!
          There sure redress
    Lies where all is lost and found._

    And Doughty, though Drake's deed of kindness flashed
    A moment's kind contrition through his heart,
    Immediately, with all his lawyer's wit
    True to the cause that hired him, laughed it by,
    And straight began to weave the treacherous web
    Of soft intrigue wherein he meant to snare
    The passions of his comrades. Night and day,
    As that small fleet drove onward o'er the deep,
    Cleaving the sunset with their bright black prows
    Or hunted by the red pursuing Dawn,
    He stirred between the high-born gentlemen
    (Whose white and jewelled hands, gallant in fight,
    And hearts remembering Crécy and Poictiers,
    Were of scant use in common seamanship),
    Between these and the men whose rough tarred arms
    Were good at equal need in storm or war
    Yet took a poorer portion of the prize,
    He stirred a subtle jealousy and fanned
    A fire that swiftly grew almost to hate.
    For when the seamen must take precedence
    Of loiterers on the deck--through half a word,
    Small, with intense device, like some fierce lens,
    He magnified their rude and blustering mode;
    Or urged some scented fop, whose idle brain
    Busied itself with momentary whims,
    To bid the master alter here a sail,
    Or there a rope; and, if the man refused,
    Doughty, at night, across the wine-cups, raved
    Against the rising insolence of the mob;
    And hinted Drake himself was half to blame,
    In words that seemed to say, "I am his friend,
    Or I should bid you think him all to blame."
    So fierce indeed the strife became that once,
    While Chester, Doughty's catspaw, played with fire,
    The grim ship-master growled between his teeth,
    "Remember, sir, remember, ere too late,
    Magellan's mutinous vice-admiral's end."
    And Doughty heard, and with a boisterous laugh
    Slapped the old sea-dog on the back and said,
    "The gallows are for dogs, not gentlemen!"
    Meanwhile his brother, sly John Doughty, sought
    To fan the seamen's fear of the unknown world
    With whispers and conjectures; and, at night,
    He brought old books of Greek and Hebrew down
    Into the foc'sle, claiming by their aid
    A knowledge of Black Art, and power to tell
    The future, which he dreadfully displayed
    There in the flickering light of the oily lamp,
    Bending above their huge and swarthy palms
    And tracing them to many a grisly doom.
    So many a night and day westward they plunged.
    The half-moon ripened to its mellow round,
    Dwindled again and ripened yet again,
    And there was nought around them but the grey
    Ruin and roar of huge Atlantic seas.
    And only like a memory of the world
    They left behind them rose the same great sun,
    And daily rolled his chariot through their sky,
    Whereof the skilled musicians made a song.


SONG

    The same sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other,
          Wherever we be;
    With the same goal before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Ringed round with the sea.

    When the breakers charged thundering
      In thousands all round us
        With a lightning of lances
          Uphurtled on high,
    When the stout ships were sundering
      A rapture hath crowned us,
        Like the wild light that dances
          On the crests that flash by.

    When the waters lay breathless
      Gazing at Hesper
        Guarding the golden
          Fruit of the tree,
    Heard we the deathless
      Wonderful whisper
        Wafting the olden
          Dream of the sea.

    No land in the ring of it
      Now, all around us
        Only the splendid
          Resurging unknown!
    How should we sing of it?--
      This that hath found us
        By the great sun attended
          In splendour, alone.

    Ah! the broad miles of it,
      White with the onset
        Of waves without number
          Warring for glee.
    Ah! the soft smiles of it
      Down to the sunset,
        Holy for slumber,
          The peace of the sea.

    The wave's heart, exalted,
      Leaps forward to meet us,
        The sun on the sea-wave
          Lies white as the moon:
    The soft sapphire-vaulted
      Deep heaven smiles to greet us,
        Free sons of the free-wave
          All singing one tune.

    _The same sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other,
          Wherever we be;
    With the same goal before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Queen of the sea._

    At last a faint-flushed April Dawn arose
    With milk-white arms up-binding golden clouds
    Of fragrant hair behind her lovely head;
    And lo, before the bright black plunging prows
    The whole sea suddenly shattered into shoals
    Of rolling porpoises. Everywhere they tore
    The glittering water. Like a moving crowd
    Of black bright rocks washed smooth by foaming tides,
    They thrilled the unconscious fancy of the crews
    With subtle, wild, and living hints of land.
    And soon Columbus' happy signals came,
    The signs that saved him when his mutineers
    Despaired at last and clamoured to return,--
    And there, with awe triumphant in their eyes,
    They saw, lazily tossing on the tide,
    A drift of seaweed, and a berried branch,
    Which silenced them as if they had seen a Hand
    Writing with fiery letters on the deep,
    Then a black cormorant, vulture of the sea,
    With neck outstretched and one long ominous _honk_,
    Went hurtling past them to its unknown bourne.
    A mighty white-winged albatross came next;
    Then flight on flight of clamorous clanging gulls;
    And last, a wild and sudden shout of "Land!"
    Echoed from crew to crew across the waves.
    Then, dumb upon the rigging as they hung
    Staring at it, a menace chilled their blood.
    For like _Il Gran Nemico_ of Dante, dark,
    Ay, coloured like a thunder-cloud, from North
    To South, in front, there slowly rose to sight
    A country like a dragon fast asleep
    Along the West, with wrinkled, purple wings
    Ending in ragged forests o'er its spine;
    And with great craggy claws out-thrust, that turned
    (As the dire distances dissolved their veils)
    To promontories bounding a huge bay.
    There o'er the hushed and ever shallower tide
    The staring ships drew nigh and thought, "Is this
    The Dragon of our Golden Apple Tree,
    The guardian of the fruit of our desire
    Which grows in gardens of the Hesperides
    Where those three sisters weave a white-armed dance
    Around it everlastingly, and sing
    Strange songs in a strange tongue that still convey
    Warning to heedful souls?" Nearer they drew,
    And now, indeed, from out a soft blue-grey
    Mingling of colours on that coast's deep flank
    There crept a garden of enchantment, height
    O'er height, a garden sloping from the hills,
    Wooded as with Aladdin's trees that bore
    All-coloured clustering gems instead of fruit;
    Now vaster as it grew upon their eyes,
    And like some Roman amphitheatre
    Cirque above mighty cirque all round the bay,
    With jewels and flowers ablaze on women's breasts
    Innumerably confounded and confused;
    While lovely faces flushed with lust of blood,
    Rank above rank upon their tawny thrones
    In soft barbaric splendour lapped, and lulled
    By the low thunderings of a thousand lions,
    Luxuriously smiled as they bent down
    Over the scarlet-splashed and steaming sands
    To watch the white-limbed gladiators die.

    Such fears and dreams for Francis Drake, at least,
    Rose and dissolved in his nigh fevered brain
    As they drew near that equatorial shore;
    For rumours had been borne to him; and now
    He knew not whether to impute the wrong
    To his untrustful mind or to believe
    Doughty a traitorous liar; yet there seemed
    Proof and to spare. A thousand shadows rose
    To mock him with their veiled indicative hands.
    And each alone he laid and exorcised
    But for each doubt he banished, one returned
    From darker depths to mock him o'er again.

    So, in that bay, the little fleet sank sail
    And anchored; and the wild reality
    Behind those dreams towered round them on the hills,
    Or so it seemed. And Drake bade lower a boat,
    And went ashore with sixteen men to seek
    Water; and, as they neared the embowered beach,
    Over the green translucent tide there came,
    A hundred yards from land, a drowsy sound
    Immeasurably repeated and prolonged,
    As of innumerable elfin drums
    Dreamily mustering in the tropic bloom.
    This from without they heard, across the waves;
    But when they glided into a flowery creek
    Under the sharp black shadows of the trees--
    Jaca and Mango and Palm and red festoons
    Of garlanded Liana wreaths--it ebbed
    Into the murmur of the mighty fronds,
    Prodigious leaves whose veinings bore the fresh
    Impression of the finger-prints of God.
    There humming-birds, like flakes of purple fire
    Upon some passing seraph's plumage, beat
    And quivered in blinding blots of golden light
    Between the embattled cactus and cardoon;
    While one huge whisper of primeval awe
    Seemed to await the cool green eventide
    When God should walk His Garden as of old.

    Now as the boats were plying to and fro
    Between the ships and that enchanted shore,
    Drake bade his comrades tarry a little and went
    Apart, alone, into the trackless woods.
    Tormented with his thoughts, he saw all round
    Once more the battling image of his mind,
    Where there was nought of man, only the vast
    Unending silent struggle of Titan trees,
    Large internecine twistings of the world,
    The hushed death-grapple and the still intense
    Locked anguish of Laocoons that gripped
    Death by the throat for thrice three hundred years,
    Once, like a subtle mockery overhead,
    Some black-armed chattering ape swung swiftly by,
    But he strode onward, thinking--"Was it false,
    False all that kind outreaching of the hands?
    False? Was there nothing certain, nothing sure
    In those divinest aisles and towers of Time
    Wherein we took sweet counsel? Is there nought
    Sure but the solid dust beneath our feet?
    Must all those lovelier fabrics of the soul,
    Being so divinely bright and delicate,
    Waver and shine no longer than some poor
    Prismatic aery bubble? Ay, they burst,
    And all their glory shrinks into one tear
    No bitterer than some idle love-lorn maid
    Sheds for her dead canary. God, it hurts,
    This, this hurts most, to think how we must miss
    What might have been, for nothing but a breath,
    A babbling of the tongue, an argument,
    Or such a poor contention as involves
    The thrones and dominations of this earth,--
    How many of us, like seed on barren ground,
    Must miss the flower and harvest of their prayers,
    The living light of friendship and the grasp
    Which for its very meaning once implied
    Eternities of utterance and the life
    Immortal of two souls beyond the grave?"

    Now, wandering upward ever, he reached and clomb
    The slope side of a fern-fringed precipice,
    And, at the summit, found an opening glade,
    Whence, looking o'er the forest, he beheld
    The sea; and, in the land-locked bay below,
    Far, far below, his elfin-tiny ships,
    All six at anchor on the crawling tide!
    Then onward, upward, through the woods once more
    He plunged with bursting heart and burning brow;
    And, once again, like madness, the black shapes
    Of doubt swung through his brain and chattered and laughed,
    Till he upstretched his arms in agony
    And cursed the name of Doughty, cursed the day
    They met, cursed his false face and courtier smiles,
    "For oh," he cried, "how easy a thing it were
    For truth to wear the garb of truth! This proves
    His treachery!" And there, at once, his thoughts
    Tore him another way, as thus, "And yet
    If he were false, is he not subtle enough
    To hide it? Why, this proves his innocence--
    This very courtly carelessness which I,
    Black-hearted evil-thinker as I am,
    In my own clumsier spirit so misjudge!
    These children of the court are butterflies
    Fluttering hither and thither, and I--poor fool--
    Would fix them to a stem and call them flowers,
    Nay, bid them grasp the ground like towering oaks
    And shadow all the zenith;" and yet again
    The madness of distrustful friendship gleamed
    From his fierce eyes, "Oh villain, damnèd villain,
    God's murrain on his heart! I know full well
    He hides what he can hide! He wears no fault
    Upon the gloss and frippery of his breast!
    It is not that! It is the hidden things,
    Unseizable, the things I do not know,
    Ay, it is these, these, these and these alone
    That I mistrust."
                        And, as he walked, the skies
    Grew full of threats, and now enormous clouds
    Rose mammoth-like above the ensanguined deep,
    Trampling the daylight out; and, with its death
    Dyed purple, rushed along as if they meant
    To obliterate the world. He took no heed.
    Though that strange blackness brimmed the branching aisles
    With horror, he strode on till in the gloom,
    Just as his winding way came out once more
    Over a precipice that o'erlooked the bay,
    There, as he went, not gazing down, but up,
    He saw what seemed a ponderous granite cliff,
    A huge ribbed shell upon a lonely shore
    Left by forgotten mountains when they sank
    Back to earth's breast like billows on a sea.
    A tall and whispering crowd of tree-ferns waved
    Mysterious fringes round it. In their midst
    He flung himself at its broad base, with one
    Sharp shivering cry of pain, "Show me Thy ways,
    O God, teach me Thy paths! I am in the dark!
    Lighten my darkness!"
                            Almost as he spoke
    There swept across the forest, far and wide,
    Gathering power and volume as it came,
    A sound as of a rushing mighty wind;
    And, overhead, like great black gouts of blood
    Wrung from the awful forehead of the Night
    The first drops fell and ceased. Then, suddenly,
    Out of the darkness, earth with all her seas,
    Her little ships at anchor in the bay
    (Five ebony ships upon a sheet of silver,
    Drake saw not that, indeed, Drake saw not that!),
    Her woods, her boughs, her leaves, her tiniest twigs.
    Leapt like a hunted stag through one immense
    Lightning of revelation into the murk
    Of Erebus: then heaven o'er rending heaven
    Shattered and crashed down ruin over the world.
    But, in that deeper darkness, Francis Drake
    Stood upright now, and with blind outstretched arms
    Groped at that strange forgotten cliff and shell
    Of mystery; for in that flash of light
    Æons had passed; and now the Thing in front
    Made his blood freeze with memories that lay
    Behind his Memory. In the gloom he groped,
    And with dark hands that knew not what they knew,
    As one that shelters in the night, unknowing,
    Beneath a stranded shipwreck, with a cry
    He touched the enormous rain-washed belted ribs
    And bones like battlements of some Mastodon
    Embedded there until the trump of doom.

    After long years, long centuries, perchance,
    Triumphantly some other pioneer
    Would stand where Drake now stood and read the tale
    Of ages where he only felt the cold
    Touch in the dark of some huge mystery;
    Yet Drake might still be nearer to the light
    Who now was whispering from his great deep heart,
    "Show me Thy ways, O God, teach me Thy paths!"
    And there by some strange instinct, oh, he felt
    God's answer there, as if he grasped a hand
    Across a gulf of twice ten thousand years;
    And he regained his lost magnificence
    Of faith in that great Harmony which resolves
    Our discords, faith through all the ruthless laws
    Of nature in their lovely pitilessness,
    Faith in that Love which outwardly must wear,
    Through all the sorrows of eternal change,
    The splendour of the indifference of God.
    All round him through the heavy purple gloom
    Sloped the soft rush of silver-arrowed rain,
    Loosening the skies' hard anguish, as with tears.
    Once more he felt his unity with all
    The vast composure of the universe,
    And drank deep at the fountains of that peace
    Which comprehends the tumult of our days.
    But with that peace the power to act returned;
    And, with his back against the Mastodon,
    He stared through the great darkness tow'rds the sea.
    The rain ceased for a moment: only the slow
    Drip of the dim droop-feathered palms all round
    Deepened the hush.
                        Then, out of the gloom once more
    The whole earth leapt to sight with all her woods,
    Her boughs, her leaves, her tiniest twigs distinct
    For one wild moment; but Drake only saw
    The white flash of her seas and there, oh there
    That land-locked bay with those five elfin ships,
    Five elfin ebony ships upon a sheet
    Of wrinkled silver! Then, as the thunder followed,
    One thought burst through his brain--
                                            _One ship was gone!_
    Over the grim precipitous edge he hung,
    An eagle waiting for the lightning now
    To swoop upon his prey. One iron hand
    Gripped a rough tree-root like a bunch of snakes;
    And, as the rain rushed round him, far away
    He saw to northward yet another flash,
    A scribble of God's finger in the sky
    Over a waste of white stampeding waves.
    His eye flashed like a falchion as he saw it,
    And from his lips there burst the sea-king's laugh;
    For there, with a fierce joy he knew, he knew
    Doughty, at last--an open mutineer!
    An open foe to fight! Ay, there she went,--
    His _Golden Hynde_, his little _Golden Hynde_
    A wild deserter scudding to the North.
    And, almost ere the lightning, Drake had gone
    Crashing down the face of the precipice,
    By a narrow water-gully, and through the huge
    Forest he tore the straight and perilous way
    Down to the shore; while, three miles to the North,
    Upon the wet poop of the _Golden Hynde_
    Doughty stood smiling. Scarce would he have smiled
    Knowing that Drake had seen him from that tower
    Amidst the thunders; but, indeed, he thought
    He had escaped unseen amidst the storm.
    Many a day he had worked upon the crew,
    Fanning their fears and doubts until he won
    The more part to his side. And when they reached
    That coast, he showed them how Drake meant to sail
    Southward, into that unknown Void; but he
    Would have them suddenly slip by stealth away
    Northward to Darien, showing them what a life
    Of roystering glory waited for them there,
    If, laying aside this empty quest, they joined
    The merry feasters round those island fires
    Which over many a dark-blue creek illumed
    Buccaneer camps in scarlet logwood groves,
    Fringing the Gulf of Mexico, till dawn
    Summoned the Black Flags out to sweep the sea.

    But when Drake reached the flower-embowered boat
    And found the men awaiting his return
    There, in a sheltering grove of bread-fruit trees
    Beneath great eaves of leafage that obscured
    Their sight, but kept the storm out, as they tossed
    Pieces of eight or rattled the bone dice,
    His voice went through them like a thunderbolt,
    For none of them had seen the _Golden Hynde_
    Steal from the bay; and now the billows burst
    Like cannon down the coast; and they had thought
    Their boat could not be launched until the storm
    Abated. Under Drake's compelling eyes,
    Nevertheless, they poled her down the creek
    Without one word, waiting their chance. Then all
    Together with their brandished oars they thrust,
    And on the fierce white out-draught of a wave
    They shot up, up and over the toppling crest
    Of the next, and plunged crashing into the trough
    Behind it: then they settled at their thwarts,
    And the fierce water boiled before their blades
    As, with Drake's iron hand upon the helm,
    They soared and crashed across the rolling seas.

    Not for the Spanish prize did Drake now steer,
    But for that little ship the _Marygold_,
    Swiftest of sail, next to the _Golden Hynde_,
    And, in the hands of Francis Drake, indeed
    Swiftest of all; and ere the seamen knew
    What power, as of a wind, bore them along,
    Anchor was up, their hands were on the sheets,
    The sails were broken out, the _Marygold_
    Was flying like a storm-cloud to the North,
    And on her poop an iron statue still
    As death stood Francis Drake.
                                  One hour they rushed
    Northward, with green seas washing o'er the deck
    And buffeted with splendour; then they saw
    The _Golden Hynde_ like some wing-broken gull
    With torn mismanaged plumes beating the air
    In peril of utter shipwreck; saw her fly
    Half-mast, a feeble signal of distress
    Despite all Doughty's curses; for her crew
    Wild with divisions torn amongst themselves
    Most gladly now surrendered in their hearts,
    As close alongside grandly onward swept
    The _Marygold_, with canvas trim and taut
    Magnificently drawing the full wind,
    Her gunners waiting at their loaded guns
    Bare-armed and silent; and that iron soul
    Alone, upon her silent quarter-deck.
    There they hauled up into the wind and lay
    Rocking, while Drake, alone, without a guard,
    Boarding the runaway, dismissed his boat
    Back to the _Marygold_. Then his voice out-rang
    Trumpet-like o'er the trembling mutineers,
    And clearly, as if they were but busied still
    About the day's routine. They hid their shame,
    As men that would propitiate a god,
    By flying to fulfil his lightest word;
    And ere they knew what power, as of a wind,
    Impelled them--that half wreck was trim and taut,
    Her sails all drawing and her bows afoam;
    And, creeping past the _Marygold_ once more,
    She led their Southward way! And not till then
    Did Drake vouchsafe one word to the white face
    Of Doughty, as he furtively slunk nigh
    With some new lie upon his fear-parched lips
    Thirsting for utterance in his crackling laugh
    Of deprecation; and with one ruffling puff
    Of pigeon courage in his blinded soul--
    "I am no sea-dog--even Francis Drake
    Would scarce misuse a gentleman."
                                        Then Drake turned
    And summoned four swart seamen out by name.
    His words went like a cold wind through their flesh
    As with a passionless voice he slowly said,
    "Take ye this fellow: bind him to the mast
    Until what time I shall decide his fate."
    And Doughty gasped as at the world's blank end,--
    "Nay, Francis," cried he, "wilt thou thus misuse
    A gentleman?" But as the seamen gripped
    His arms he struggled vainly and furiously
    To throw them off; and in his impotence
    Let slip the whole of his treacherous cause and hope
    In empty wrath,--"Fore God," he foamed and snarled,
    "Ye shall all smart for this when we return!
    Unhand me, dogs! I have Lord Burleigh's power
    Behind me. There is nothing I have done
    Without his warrant! Ye shall smart for this!
    Unhand me, I say, unhand me!"
                                    And in one flash
    Drake saw the truth, and Doughty saw his eyes
    Lighten upon him; and his false heart quailed
    Once more; and he suddenly suffered himself
    Quietly, strangely, to be led away
    And bound without a murmur to the mast.
    And strangely Drake remembered, as those words,
    "Ye shall all smart for this when we return,"
    Yelped at his faith, how while the Dover cliffs
    Faded from sight he leaned to his new friend
    Doughty and said: "I blame them not who stay!
    I blame them not at all who cling to home,
    For many of us, indeed, shall not return,
    Nor ever know that sweetness any more."

    And when they had reached their anchorage anew,
    Drake, having now resolved to bring his fleet
    Beneath a more compact control, at once
    Took all the men and the chief guns and stores
    From out the Spanish prize; and sent Tom Moone
    To set the hulk afire. Also he bade
    Unbind the traitor and ordered him aboard
    The pinnace _Christopher_. John Doughty, too,
    He ordered thither, into the grim charge
    Of old Tom Moone, thinking it best to keep
    The poisonous leaven carefully apart
    Until they had won well Southward, to a place
    Where, finally committed to their quest,
    They might arraign the traitor without fear
    Or favour, and acquit him or condemn.
    But those two brothers, doubting as the false
    Are damned to doubt, saw murder in his eyes,
    And thought "He means to sink the smack one night."
    And they refused to go, till Drake abruptly
    Ordered them straightway to be slung on board
    With ropes.
                  The daylight waned; but ere the sun
    Sank, the five ships were plunging to the South;
    For Drake would halt no longer, least the crows
    Also should halt betwixt two purposes.
    He took the tide of fortune at the flood;
    And onward through the now subsiding storm,
    Ere they could think what power as of a wind
    Impelled them, he had swept them on their way.
    Far, far into the night they saw the blaze
    That leapt in crimson o'er the abandoned hulk
    Behind them, like a mighty hecatomb
    Marking the path of some Titanic will.
    Many a night and day they Southward drove.
    Sometimes at midnight round them all the sea
    Quivered with witches' oils and water snakes,
    Green, blue, and red, with lambent tongues of fire.
    Mile upon mile about the blurred black hulls
    A cauldron of tempestuous colour coiled.
    On every mast mysterious meteors burned,
    And from the shores a bellowing rose and fell
    As of great bestial gods that walked all night
    Through some wild hell unknown, too vast for men;
    But when the silver and crimson of the dawn
    Broke out, they saw the tropic shores anew,
    The fair white foam, and, round about the rocks,
    Weird troops of tusked sea-lions; and the world
    Mixed with their dreams and made them stranger still.
    And, once, so fierce a tempest scattered the fleet
    That even the hardiest souls began to think
    There was a Jonah with them; for the seas
    Rose round them like green mountains, peaked and rigged
    With heights of Alpine snow amongst the clouds;
    And many a league to Southward, when the ships
    Gathered again amidst the sinking waves
    Four only met. The ship of Thomas Drake
    Was missing; and some thought it had gone down
    With all hands in the storm. But Francis Drake
    Held on his way, learning from hour to hour
    To merge himself in immortality;
    Learning the secrets of those pitiless laws
    Which dwarf all mortal grief, all human pain,
    To something less than nothing by the side
    Of that eternal travail dimly guessed,
    Since first he felt in the miraculous dark
    The great bones of the Mastodon, that hulk
    Of immemorial death. He learned to judge
    The passing pageant of this outward world
    As by the touch-stone of that memory;
    Even as in that country which some said
    Lay now not far, the great Tezcucan king,
    Resting his jewelled hand upon a skull,
    And on a smouldering glory of jewels throned
    There in his temple of the Unknown God
    Over the host of Aztec princes, clad
    In golden hauberks gleaming under soft
    Surcoats of green or scarlet feather-work,
    Could in the presence of a mightier power
    Than life or death, give up his guilty sons,
    His only sons, to the sacrificial sword.
    And hour by hour the soul of Francis Drake,
    Unconscious as an oak-tree of its growth,
    Increased in strength and stature as he drew
    Earth, heaven, and hell within him, more and more.
    For as the dream we call our world, with all
    Its hues is but a picture in the brain,
    So did his soul enfold the universe
    With gradual sense of superhuman power,
    While every visible shape within the vast
    Horizon seemed the symbol of some, thought
    Waiting for utterance. He had found indeed
    God's own Nirvana, not of empty dream,
    But of intensest life. Nor did he think
    Aught of all this; but, as the rustic deems
    The colours that he carries in his brain
    Are somehow all outside him while he peers
    Unaltered through two windows in his face,
    Drake only knew that as the four ships plunged
    Southward, the world mysteriously grew
    More like a prophet's vision, hour by hour,
    Fraught with dark omens and significances,
    A world of hieroglyphs and sacred signs
    Wherein he seemed to read the truth that lay
    Hid from the Roman augurs when of old
    They told the future from the flight of birds.
    How vivid with disaster seemed the flight
    Of those blood-red flamingoes o'er the dim
    Blue steaming forest, like two terrible thoughts
    Flashing, unapprehended, through his brain!

    And now, as they drove Southward, day and night,
    Through storm and calm, the shores that fleeted by
    Grew wilder, grander, with his growing soul,
    And pregnant with the approaching mystery.
    And now along the Patagonian coast
    They cruised, and in the solemn midnight saw
    Wildernesses of shaggy barren marl,
    Petrified seas of lava, league on league,
    Craters and bouldered slopes and granite cliffs
    With ragged rents, grim gorges, deep ravines,
    And precipice on precipice up-piled
    Innumerable to those dim distances
    Where, over valleys hanging in the clouds,
    Gigantic mountains and volcanic peaks
    Catching the wefts of cirrus fleece appeared
    To smoke against the sky, though all was now
    Dead as that frozen chaos of the moon,
    Or some huge passion of a slaughtered soul
    Prostrate under the marching of the stars.

    At last, and in a silver dawn, they came
    Suddenly on a broad-winged estuary,
    And, in the midst of it, an island lay,
    There they found shelter, on its leeward side,
    And Drake convened upon the _Golden Hynde_
    His dread court-martial. Two long hours he heard
    Defence and accusation, then broke up
    The conclave, and, with burning heart and brain,
    Feverishly seeking everywhere some sign
    To guide him, went ashore upon that isle,
    And lo, turning a rugged point of rock,
    He rubbed his eyes to find out if he dreamed,
    For there--a Crusoe's wonder, a miracle,
    A sign--before him stood on that lone strand
    Stark, with a stern arm pointing out his way
    And jangling still one withered skeleton,
    The grim black gallows where Magellan hanged
    His mutineers. Its base was white with bones
    Picked by the gulls, and crumbling o'er the sand
    A dread sea-salt, dry from the tides of time.
    There, on that lonely shore, Death's finger-post
    Stood like some old forgotten truth made strange
    By the long lapse of many memories,
    All starting up in resurrection now
    As at the trump of doom, heroic ghosts
    Out of the cells and graves of his deep brain
    Reproaching him. "_Were this man not thy friend,
    Ere now he should have died the traitor's death.
    What wilt thou say to others if they, too,
    Prove false? Or wilt thou slay the lesser and save
    The greater sinner? Nay, if thy right hand
    Offend thee, cut it off!_" And, in one flash,
    Drake saw his path and chose it.
                                      With a voice
    Low as the passionless anguished voice of Fate
    That comprehends all pain, but girds it round
    With iron, lest some random cry break out
    For man's misguidance, he drew all his men
    Around him, saying, "Ye all know how I loved
    Doughty, who hath betrayed me twice and thrice,
    For I still trusted him: he was no felon
    That I should turn my heart away from him.
    He is the type and image of man's laws;
    While I--am lawless as the soul that still
    Must sail and seek a world beyond the worlds,
    A law behind earth's laws. I dare not judge!
    But ye--who know the mighty goal we seek,
    Who have seen him sap our courage, hour by hour,
    Till God Himself almost appeared a dream
    Behind his technicalities and doubts
    Of aught he could not touch or handle: ye
    Who have seen him stir up jealousy and strife
    Between our seamen and our gentlemen,
    Even as the world stirs up continual strife,
    Bidding the man forget he is a man
    With God's own patent of nobility;
    Ye who have seen him strike this last sharp blow--
    Sharper than any enemy hath struck,--
    He whom I trusted, he alone could strike--
    So sharply, for indeed I loved this man.
    Judge ye--for see, I cannot. Do not doubt
    I loved this man!
    But now, if ye will let him have his life,
    Oh, speak! But, if ye think it must be death,
    Hold up your hands in silence!" His voice dropped,
    And eagerly he whispered forth one word
    Beyond the scope of Fate--
    "I would not have him die!" There was no sound
    Save the long thunder of eternal seas,--
    Drake bowed his head and waited.
                                              Suddenly,
    One man upheld his hand; then, all at once,
    A brawny forest of brown arms arose
    In silence, and the great sea whispered _Death_.

       *   *   *   *

    There, with one big swift impulse, Francis Drake
    Held out his right sun-blackened hand and gripped
    The hand that Doughty proffered him; and lo,
    Doughty laughed out and said, "Since I must die,
    Let us have one more hour of comradeship,
    One hour as old companions. Let us make
    A feast here, on this island, ere I go
    Where there is no more feasting." So they made
    A great and solemn banquet as the day
    Decreased; and Doughty bade them all unlock
    Their sea-chests and bring out their rich array.
    There, by that wondering ocean of the West,
    In crimson doublets, lined and slashed with gold,
    In broidered lace and double golden chains
    Embossed with rubies and great cloudy pearls
    They feasted, gentlemen adventurers,
    Drinking old malmsey, as the sun sank down.

    Now Doughty, fronting the rich death of day,
    And flourishing a silver pouncet-box
    With many a courtly jest and rare conceit,
    There as he sat in rich attire, out-braved
    The rest. Though darker-hued, yet richer far,
    His murrey-coloured doublet double-piled
    Of Genoa velvet, puffed with ciprus, shone;
    For over its grave hues the gems that bossed
    His golden collar, wondrously relieved,
    Blazed lustrous to the West like stars. But Drake
    Was clad in black, with midnight silver slashed,
    And, at his side, a great two-handed sword.
    At last they rose, just as the sun's last rays
    Rested upon the heaving molten gold
    Immeasurable. The long slow sigh of the waves
    That creamed across the lonely time-worn reef
    All round the island seemed the very voice
    Of the Everlasting: black against the sea
    The gallows of Magellan stretched its arm
    With the gaunt skeleton and its rusty chain
    Creaking and swinging in the solemn breath
    Of eventide like some strange pendulum
    Measuring out the moments that remained.
    There did they take the holy sacrament
    Of Jesus' body and blood. Then Doughty and Drake
    Kissed each other, as brothers, on the cheek;
    And Doughty knelt. And Drake, without one word,
    Leaning upon the two-edged naked sword
    Stood at his side, with iron lips, and eyes
    Full of the sunset; while the doomed man bowed
    His head upon a rock. The great sun dropped
    Suddenly, and the land and sea were dark;
    And as it were a sign, Drake lifted up
    The gleaming sword. It seemed to sweep the heavens
    Down in its arc as he smote, once, and no more.

    Then, for a moment, silence froze their veins,
    Till one fierce seamen stooped with a hoarse cry;
    And, like an eagle clutching up its prey,
    His arm swooped down and bore the head aloft,
    Gorily streaming, by the long dark hair;
    And a great shout went up, "So perish all
    Traitors to God and England." Then Drake turned
    And bade them to their ships; and, wondering,
    They left him. As the boats thrust out from shore
    Brave old Tom Moone looked back with faithful eyes
    Like a great mastiff to his master's face.
    He, looming larger from his loftier ground
    Clad with the slowly gathering night of stars
    And gazing seaward o'er his quiet dead,
    Seemed like some Titan bronze in grandeur based
    Unshakeable until the crash of doom
    Shatter the black foundations of the world.


BOOK IV

    Dawn, everlasting and almighty Dawn,
    Hailed by ten thousand names of death and birth,
    Who, chiefly by thy name of Sorrow, seem'st
    To half the world a sunset, God's great Dawn,
    Fair light of all earth's partings till we meet
    Where dawn and sunset, mingling East and West,
    Shall make in some deep Orient of the soul
    One radiant Rose of Love for evermore;
    Teach me, oh teach to bear thy broadening light,
    Thy deepening wonder, lest as old dreams fade
    With love's unfaith, like wasted hours of youth,
    And dim illusions vanish in thy beam,
    Their rapture and their anguish break that heart
    Which loved them, and must love for ever now.
    Let thy great sphere of splendour, ring by ring
    For ever widening, draw new seas, new skies,
    Within my ken; yet, as I still must bear
    This love, help me to grow in spirit with thee.
    Dawn on my song which trembles like a cloud
    Pierced with thy beauty. Rise, shine, as of old
    Across the wondering ocean in the sight
    Of those world-wandering mariners, when earth
    Rolled flat up to the Gates of Paradise,
    And each slow mist that curled its gold away
    From each new sea they furrowed into pearl
    Might bring before their blinded mortal eyes
    God and the Glory. Lighten as on the soul
    Of him that all night long in torment dire,
    Anguish and thirst unceasing for thy ray
    Upon that lonely Patagonian shore
    Had lain as on the bitterest coasts of Hell.
    For all night long, mocked by the dreadful peace
    Of world-wide seas that darkly heaved and sank
    With cold recurrence, like the slow sad breath
    Of a fallen Titan dying all alone
    In lands beyond all human loneliness,
    While far and wide glimmers that broken targe
    Hurled from tremendous battle with the gods,
    And, as he breathes in pain, the chain-mail rings
    Round his broad breast a muffled rattling make
    For many a league, so seemed the sound of waves
    Upon those beaches--there, be-mocked all night,
    Beneath Magellan's gallows, Drake had watched
    Beside his dead; and over him the stars
    Paled as the silver chariot of the moon
    Drove, and her white steeds ramped in a fury of foam
    On splendid peaks of cloud. The _Golden Hynde_
    Slept with those other shadows on the bay.
    Between him and his home the Atlantic heaved;
    And, on the darker side, across the strait
    Of starry sheen that softly rippled and flowed
    Betwixt the mainland and his isle, it seemed
    Death's Gates indeed burst open. The night yawned
    Like a foul wound. Black shapes of the outer dark
    Poured out of forests older than the world;
    And, just as reptiles that take form and hue,
    Speckle and blotch, in strange assimilation
    From thorn and scrub and stone and the waste earth
    Through which they crawl, so that almost they seem
    The incarnate spirits of their wilderness,
    Were these most horrible kindred of the night.
    Æonian glooms unfathomable, grim aisles,
    Grotesque, distorted boughs and dancing shades
    Out-belched their dusky brood on the dim shore;
    Monsters with sooty limbs, red-raddled eyes,
    And faces painted yellow, women and men;
    Fierce naked giants howling to the moon,
    And loathlier Gorgons with long snaky tresses
    Pouring vile purple over pendulous breasts
    Like wine-bags. On the mainland beach they lit
    A brushwood fire that reddened creek and cove
    And lapped their swarthy limbs with hideous tongues
    Of flame; so near that by their light Drake saw
    The blood upon the dead man's long black hair
    Clotting corruption. The fierce funeral pyre
    Of all things fair seemed rolling on that shore;
    And in that dull red battle of smoke and flame,
    While the sea crunched the pebbles, and dark drums
    Rumbled out of the gloom as if this earth
    Had some Titanic tigress for a soul
    Purring in forests of Eternity
    Over her own grim dreams, his lonely spirit
    Passed through the circles of a world-wide waste
    Darker than ever Dante roamed. No gulf
    Was this of fierce harmonious reward,
    Where Evil moans in anguish after death,
    Where all men reap as they have sown, where gluttons
    Gorge upon toads and usurers gulp hot streams
    Of molten gold. This was that Malebolge
    Which hath no harmony to mortal ears,
    But seems the reeling and tremendous dream
    Of some omnipotent madman. There he saw
    The naked giants dragging to the flames
    Young captives hideous with a new despair:
    He saw great craggy blood-stained stones upheaved
    To slaughter, saw through mists of blood and fire
    The cannibal feast prepared, saw filthy hands
    Rend limb from limb, and almost dreamed he saw
    Foul mouths a-drip with quivering human flesh
    And horrible laughter in the crimson storm
    That clomb and leapt and stabbed at the high heaven
    Till the whole night seemed saturate with red.

    And all night long upon the _Golden Hynde_,
    A cloud upon the waters, brave Tom Moone
    Watched o'er the bulwarks for some dusky plunge
    To warn him if that savage crew should mark
    His captain and swim over to his isle.
    Whistle in hand he watched, his boat well ready,
    His men low-crouched around him, swarthy faces
    Grim-chinned upon the taffrail, muttering oaths
    That trampled down the fear i' their bristly throats,
    While at their sides a dreadful hint of steel
    Sent stray gleams to the stars. But little heed
    Had Drake of all that menaced him, though oft
    Some wandering giant, belching from the feast,
    All blood-besmeared, would come so near he heard
    His heavy breathing o'er the narrow strait.
    Yet little care had Drake, for though he sat
    Bowed in the body above his quiet dead,
    His burning spirit wandered through the wastes,
    Wandered through hells behind the apparent hell,
    Horrors immeasurable, clutching at dreams
    Found fair of old, but now most foul. The world
    Leered at him through its old remembered mask
    Of beauty: the green grass that clothed the fields
    Of England (shallow, shallow fairy dream!)
    What was it but the hair of dead men's graves.
    Rooted in death, enriched with all decay?
    And like a leprosy the hawthorn bloom
    Crawled o'er the whitening bosom of the spring;
    And bird and beast and insect, ay and man,
    How fat they fed on one another's blood!
    And Love, what faith in Love, when spirit and flesh
    Are found of such a filthy composition?
    And Knowledge, God, his mind went reeling back
    To that dark voyage on the deadly coast
    Of Panama, where one by one his men
    Sickened and died of some unknown disease,
    Till Joseph, his own brother, in his arms
    Died; and Drake trampled down all tender thought,
    All human grief, and sought to find the cause,
    For his crew's sake, the ravenous unknown cause
    Of that fell scourge. There, in his own dark cabin,
    Lit by the wild light of the swinging lanthorn,
    He laid the naked body on that board
    Where they had supped together. He took the knife
    From the ague-stricken surgeon's palsied hands,
    And while the ship rocked in the eternal seas
    And dark waves lapped against the rolling hulk
    Making the silence terrible with voices,
    He opened his own brother's cold white corse,
    That pale deserted mansion of a soul,
    Bidding the surgeon mark, with his own eyes,
    While yet he had strength to use them, the foul spots,
    The swollen liver, the strange sodden heart,
    The yellow intestines. Yea, his dry lips hissed
    There in the stark face of Eternity,
    "Seëst thou? Seëst thou? Knowest thou what it means?"
    Then, like a dream up-surged the belfried night
    Of Saint Bartholomew, the scented palaces
    Whence harlots leered out on the twisted streets
    Of Paris, choked with slaughter! Europe flamed
    With human torches, living altar candles,
    Lighted before the Cross where men had hanged
    The Christ of little children. Cirque by cirque
    The world-wide hell reeled round him, East and West,
    To where the tortured Indians worked the will
    Of lordly Spain in golden-famed Peru.
    "God, is thy world a madman's dream?" he groaned:
    And suddenly, the clamour on the shore
    Sank and that savage horde melted away
    Into the midnight forest as it came,
    Leaving no sign, save where the brushwood fire
    Still smouldered like a ruby in the gloom;
    And into the inmost caverns of his mind
    That other clamour sank, and there was peace.
    "A madman's dream," he whispered, "Ay, to me
    A madman's dream," but better, better far
    Than that which bears upon its awful gates,
    Gates of a hell defined, unalterable,
    _Abandon hope all ye who enter here!_
    Here, here at least the dawn hath power to bring
    New light, new hope, new battles. Men may fight
    And sweep away that evil, if no more,
    At least from the small circle of their swords;
    Then die, content if they have struck one stroke
    For freedom, knowledge, brotherhood; one stroke
    To hasten that great kingdom God proclaims
    Each morning through the trumpets of the Dawn.

    And far away, in Italy, that night
    Young Galileo, gazing upward, heard
    The self-same whisper from the abyss of stars
    Which lured the soul of Shakespeare as he lay
    Dreaming in may-sweet England, even now,
    And with its infinite music called once more
    The soul of Drake out to the unknown West.

    Now like a wild rose in the fields of heaven
    Slipt forth the slender fingers of the Dawn,
    And drew the great grey Eastern curtains back
    From the ivory saffroned couch. Rosily slid
    One shining foot and one warm rounded knee
    From silken coverlets of the tossed-back clouds.
    Then, like the meeting after desolate years,
    Face to remembered face, Drake saw the Dawn
    Step forth in naked splendour o'er the sea;
    Dawn, bearing still her rich divine increase
    Of beauty, love, and wisdom round the world;
    The same, yet not the same. So strangely gleamed
    Her pearl and rose across the sapphire waves
    That scarce he knew the dead man at his feet.
    His world was made anew. Strangely his voice
    Rang through that solemn Eden of the morn
    Calling his men, and stranger than a dream
    Their boats black-blurred against the crimson East,
    Or flashing misty sheen where'er the light
    Smote on their smooth wet sides, like seraph ships
    Moved in a dewy glory towards the land;
    Their oars of glittering diamond broke the sea
    As by enchantment into burning jewels
    And scattered rainbows from their flaming blades.
    The clear green water lapping round their prows,
    The words of sharp command as now the keels
    Crunched on his lonely shore, and the following wave
    Leapt slapping o'er the sterns, in that new light
    Were more than any miracle. At last
    Drake, as they grouped a little way below
    The crumbling sandy cliff whereon he stood,
    Seeming to overshadow them as he loomed
    A cloud of black against the crimson sky,
    Spoke, as a man may hardly speak but once:
    "My seamen, oh my friends, companions, kings;
    For I am least among you, being your captain;
    And ye are men, and all men born are kings,
    By right divine, and I the least of these
    Because I must usurp the throne of God
    And sit in judgment, even till I have set
    My seal upon the red wax of this blood,
    This blood of my dead friend, ere it grow cold.
    Not all the waters of that mighty sea
    Could wash my hands of sin if I should now
    Falter upon my path. But look to it, you,
    Whose word was doom last night to this dead man;
    Look to it, I say, look to it! Brave men might shrink
    From this great voyage; but the heart of him
    Who dares turn backward now must be so hardy
    That God might make a thousand millstones of it
    To hang about the necks of those that hurt
    Some little child, and cast them in the sea.
    Yet if ye will be found so more than bold,
    Speak now, and I will hear you; God will judge.
    But ye shall take four ships of these my five,
    Tear out the lions from their painted shields,
    And speed you homeward. Leave me but one ship,
    My _Golden Hynde_, and five good friends, nay one,
    To watch when I must sleep, and I will prove
    This judgment just against all winds that blow.
    Now ye that will return, speak, let me know you,
    Or be for ever silent, for I swear
    Over this butchered body, if any swerve
    Hereafter from the straight and perilous way,
    He shall not die alone. What? Will none speak?
    My comrades and my friends! Yet ye must learn,
    Mark me, my friends, I'd have you all to know
    That ye are kings. I'll have no jealousies
    Aboard my fleet. I'll have the gentleman
    To pull and haul wi' the seaman. I'll not have
    That canker of the Spaniards in my fleet.
    Ye that were captains, I cashier you all.
    I'll have no captains; I'll have nought but seamen,
    Obedient to my will, because I serve
    England. What, will ye murmur? Have a care,
    Lest I should bid you homeward all alone,
    You whose white hands are found too delicate
    For aught but dallying with your jewelled swords!
    And thou, too, master Fletcher, my ship's chaplain,
    Mark me, I'll have no priest-craft. I have heard
    Overmuch talk of judgment from thy lips,
    God's judgment here, God's judgment there, upon us!
    Whene'er the winds are contrary, thou takest
    Their powers upon thee for thy moment's end.
    Thou art God's minister, not God's oracle:
    Chain up thy tongue a little, or, by His wounds,
    If thou canst read this wide world like a book,
    Thou hast so little to fear, I'll set thee adrift
    On God's great sea to find thine own way home.
    Why, 'tis these very tyrannies o' the soul
    We strike at when we strike at Spain for England;
    And shall we here, in this great wilderness,
    Ungrappled and unchallenged, out of sight,
    Alone, without one struggle, sink that flag
    Which, when the cannon thundered, could but stream
    Triumphant over all the storms of death.
    Nay, master Wynter and my gallant captains,
    I see ye are tamed. Take up your ranks again
    In humbleness, remembering ye are kings,
    Kings for the sake and by the will of England,
    Therefore her servants till your lives' last end.
    Comrades, mistake not this, our little fleet
    Is freighted with the golden heart of England,
    And, if we fail, that golden heart will break.
    The world's wide eyes are on us, and our souls
    Are woven together into one great flag
    Of England. Shall we strike it? Shall it be rent
    Asunder with small discord, party strife,
    Ephemeral conflict of contemptible tongues,
    Or shall it be blazoned, blazoned evermore
    On the most heaven-wide page of history?
    This is that hour, I know it in my soul,
    When we must choose for England. Ye are kings,
    And sons of Vikings, exiled from your throne.
    Have ye forgotten? Nay, your blood remembers!
    There is your kingdom, Vikings, that great ocean
    Whose tang is in your nostrils. Ye must choose
    Whether to re-assume it now for England,
    To claim its thunders for her panoply,
    To lay its lightnings in her sovereign hands,
    Win her the great commandment of the sea
    And let its glory roll with her dominion
    Round the wide world for ever, sweeping back
    All evil deeds and dreams, or whether to yield
    For evermore that kinghood. Ye must learn
    Here in this golden dawn our great emprise
    Is greater than we knew. Eye hath not seen,
    Ear hath not heard what came across the dark
    Last night, as there anointed with that blood
    I knelt and saw the wonder that should be.
    I saw new heavens of freedom, a new earth
    Released from all old tyrannies. I saw
    The brotherhood of man, for which we rode,
    Most ignorant of the splendour of our spears,
    Against the crimson dynasties of Spain.
    Mother of freedom, home and hope and love,
    Our little island, far, how far away,
    I saw thee shatter the whole world of hate,
    I saw the sunrise on thy helmet flame
    With new-born hope for all the world in thee!
    Come now, to sea, to sea!"

                                And ere they knew
    What power impelled them, with one mighty cry
    They lifted up their hearts to the new dawn
    And hastened down the shores and launched the boats,
    And in the fierce white out-draught of the waves
    Thrust with their brandished oars and the boats leapt
    Out, and they settled at the groaning thwarts,
    And the white water boiled before their blades,
    As, with Drake's iron hand upon the helm,
    His own boat led the way; and ere they knew
    What power as of a wind bore them along,
    Anchor was up, their hands were on the sheets,
    The sails were broken out and that small squadron
    Was flying like a sea-bird to the South.
    Now to the strait Magellanus they came,
    And entered in with ringing shouts of joy.
    Nor did they think there, was a fairer strait
    In all the world than this which lay so calm
    Between great silent mountains crowned with snow,
    Unutterably lonely. Marvellous
    The pomp of dawn and sunset on those heights,
    And like a strange new sacrilege the advance
    Of prows that ploughed that time-forgotten tide.
    But soon rude flaws, cross currents, tortuous channels
    Bewildered them, and many a league they drove
    As down some vaster Acheron, while the coasts
    With wailing voices cursed them all night long,
    And once again the hideous fires leapt red
    By many a grim wrenched crag and gaunt ravine.
    So for a hundred leagues of whirling spume
    They groped, till suddenly, far away, they saw
    Full of the sunset, like a cup of gold,
    The purple Westward portals of the strait.
    Onward o'er roughening waves they plunged and reached
    _Capo Desiderato_, where they saw
    What seemed stupendous in that lonely place,--
    Gaunt, black, and sharp as death against the sky
    The Cross, the great black Cross on Cape Desire,
    Which dead Magellan raised upon the height
    To guide, or so he thought, his wandering ships,
    Not knowing they had left him to his doom,
    Not knowing how with tears, with tears of joy,
    Rapture, and terrible triumph, and deep awe,
    Another should come voyaging and read
    Unutterable glories in that sign;
    While his rough seamen raised their mighty shout
    And, once again, before his wondering eyes,
    League upon league of awful burnished gold,
    Rolled the unknown immeasurable sea.

    Now, in those days, as even Magellan held,
    Men thought that Southward of the strait there swept
    Firm land up to the white Antarticke Pole,
    Which now not far they deemed. But when Drake passed
    From out the strait to take his Northward way
    Up the Pacific coast, a great head-wind
    Suddenly smote them; and the heaving seas
    Bulged all around them into billowy hills,
    Dark rolling mountains, whose majestic crests
    Like wild white flames far-blown and savagely flickering
    Swept through the clouds; and on their sullen slopes
    Like wind-whipt withered leaves those little ships,
    Now hurtled to the Zenith and now plunged
    Down into bottomless gulfs, were suddenly scattered
    And whirled away. Drake, on the _Golden Hynde_,
    One moment saw them near him, soaring up
    Above him on the huge o'erhanging billows
    As if to crash down on his poop; the next,
    A mile of howling sea had swept between
    Each of those wind-whipt straws, and they were gone
    Through roaring deserts of embattled death,
    Where, like a hundred thousand chariots charged
    With lightnings and with thunders, one great wave
    Leading the unleashed ocean down the storm
    Hurled them away to Southward.

                                    One last glimpse
    Drake caught o' the _Marygold_, when some mighty vortex
    Wide as the circle of the wide sea-line
    Swept them together again. He saw her staggering
    With mast snapt short and wreckage-tangled deck
    Where men like insects clung. He saw the waves
    Leap over her mangled hulk, like wild white wolves,
    Volleying out of the clouds down dismal steeps
    Of green-black water. Like a wounded steed
    Quivering upon its haunches, up she heaved
    Her head to throw them off. Then, in one mass
    Of fury crashed the great deep over her,
    Trampling her down, down into the nethermost pit,
    As with a madman's wrath. She rose no more,
    And in the stream of the ocean's hurricane laughter
    The _Golden Hynde_ went hurtling to the South,
    With sails rent into ribbons and her mast
    Snapt like a twig. Yea, where Magellan thought
    Firm land had been, the little _Golden Hynde_
    Whirled like an autumn leaf through league on league
    Of bursting seas, chaos on crashing chaos,
    A rolling wilderness of charging Alps
    That shook the world with their tremendous war;
    Grim beetling cliffs that grappled with clamorous gulfs,
    Valleys that yawned to swallow the wide heaven;
    Immense white-flowering fluctuant precipices,
    And hills that swooped down at the throat of hell;
    From Pole to Pole, one blanching bursting storm
    Of world-wide oceans, where the huge Pacific
    Roared greetings to the Atlantic and both swept
    In broad white cataracts, league on struggling league,
    Pursuing and pursued, immeasurable,
    With Titan hands grasping the rent black sky
    East, West, North, South. Then, then was battle indeed
    Of midget men upon that wisp of grass
    The _Golden Hynde_, who, as her masts crashed, hung
    Clearing the tiny wreckage from small decks
    With ant-like weapons. Not their captain's voice
    Availed them now amidst the deafening thunder
    Of seas that felt the heavy hand of God,
    Only they saw across the blinding spume
    In steely flashes, grand and grim, a face,
    Like the last glimmer of faith among mankind,
    Calm in this warring universe, where Drake
    Stood, lashed to his post, beside the helm. Black seas
    Buffeted him. Half-stunned he dashed away
    The sharp brine from his eagle eyes and turned
    To watch some mountain-range come rushing down
    As if to o'erwhelm them utterly. Once, indeed,
    Welkin and sea were one black wave, white-fanged,
    White-crested, and up-heaped so mightily
    That, though it coursed more swiftly than a herd
    Of Titan steeds upon some terrible plain
    Nigh the huge City of Ombos, yet it seemed
    Most strangely slow, with all those crumbling crests
    Each like a cataract on a mountain-side,
    And moved with the steady majesty of doom
    High over him. One moment's flash of fear,
    And yet not fear, but rather life's regret,
    Felt Drake, then laughed a low deep laugh of joy
    Such as men taste in battle; yea, 'twas good
    To grapple thus with death; one low deep laugh,
    One mutter as of a lion about to spring,
    Then burst that thunder o'er him. Height o'er height
    The heavens rolled down, and waves were all the world.

    Meanwhile, in England, dreaming of her sailor,
    Far off, his heart's bride waited, of a proud
    And stubborn house the bright and gracious flower.
    Whom oft her father urged with scanty grace
    That Drake was dead and she had best forget
    The fellow, he grunted. For her father's heart
    Was fettered with small memories, mocked by all
    The greater world's traditions and the trace
    Of earth's low pedigree among the suns,
    Ringed with the terrible twilight of the Gods,
    Ringed with the blood-red dusk of dying nations,
    His faith was in his grandam's mighty skirt,
    And, in that awful consciousness of power,
    Had it not been that even in this he feared
    To sully her silken flounce or farthingale
    Wi' the white dust on his hands, he would have chalked
    To his own shame, thinking it shame, the word
    Nearest to God in its divine embrace
    Of agonies and glories, the dread word
    _Demos_ across that door in Nazareth
    Whence came the prentice carpenter whose voice
    Hath shaken kingdoms down, whose menial gibbet
    Rises triumphant o'er the wreck of Empires
    And stretches out its arms amongst the Stars.
    But she, his daughter, only let her heart
    Loveably forge a charter for her love,
    Cheat her false creed with faithful faery dreams
    That wrapt her love in mystery; thought, perchance,
    He came of some unhappy noble race
    Ruined in battle for some lost high cause.
    And, in the general mixture of men's blood,
    Her dream was truer than his whose bloodless pride
    Urged her to wed the chinless moon-struck fool
    Sprung from five hundred years of idiocy
    Who now besought her hand; would force her bear
    Some heir to a calf's tongue and a coronet,
    Whose cherished taints of blood will please his friends
    With "Yea, Sir William's first-born hath the freak,
    The family freak, being embryonic. Yea,
    And with a fine half-wittedness, forsooth.
    Praise God, our children's children yet shall see
    The lord o' the manor muttering to himself
    At midnight by the gryphon-guarded gates,
    Or gnawing his nails in desolate corridors,
    Or pacing moonlit halls, dagger in hand,
    Waiting to stab his father's pitiless ghost."
    So she--the girl--Sweet Bess of Sydenham,
    Most innocently proud, was prouder yet
    Than thus to let her heart stoop to the lure
    Of lording lovers, though her unstained soul
    Slumbered amidst those dreams as in old tales
    The princess in the enchanted forest sleeps
    Till the prince wakes her with a kiss and draws
    The far-flung hues o' the gleaming magic web
    Into one heart of flame. And now, for Drake,
    She slept like Brynhild in a ring of fire
    Which he must pass to win her. For the wrath
    Of Spain now flamed, awaiting his return,
    All round the seas of home; and even the Queen
    Elizabeth flinched, as that tremendous Power
    Menaced the heart of England, flinched and vowed
    Drake's head to Spain's ambassadors, though still
    By subtlety she hoped to find some way
    Later to save or warn him ere he came.
    Perchance too, nay, most like, he will be slain
    Or even now lies dead, out in the West,
    She thought, and then the promise works no harm.
    But, day by day, there came as on the wings
    Of startled winds from o'er the Spanish Main,
    Strange echoes as of sacked and clamouring ports
    And battered gates of fabulous golden cities,
    A murmur out of the sunset of Peru,
    A sea-bird's wail from Lima. While no less
    The wrathful menace gathered up its might
    All round our little isle; till now the King
    Philip of Spain half secretly decreed
    The building of huge docks from which to launch
    A Fleet Invincible that should sweep the seas
    Of all the world, throttle with one broad grasp
    All Protestant rebellion, having stablished
    His red feet in the Netherlands, thence to hurl
    His whole World-Empire at this little isle,
    England, our mother, home and hope and love,
    And bend her neck beneath his yoke. For now
    No half surrender sought he. At his back,
    Robed with the scarlet of a thousand martyrs,
    Admonishing him, stood Rome, and, in her hand,
    Grasping the Cross of Christ by its great hilt,
    She pointed it, like a dagger, tow'rds the throat
    Of England.

                  One long year, two years had passed
    Since Drake set sail from grey old Plymouth Sound;
    And in those woods of faery wonder still
    Slumbered his love in steadfast faith. But now
    With louder lungs her father urged--"He is dead:
    Forget him. There is one that loves you, seeks
    Your hand in marriage, and he is a goodly match
    E'en for my daughter. You shall wed him, Bess!"
    But when the new-found lover came to woo,
    Glancing in summer silks and radiant hose,
    Whipt doublet and enormous pointed shoon,
    She played him like a fish and sent him home
    Spluttering with dismay, a stickleback
    Discoloured, a male minnow of dimpled streams
    With all his rainbows paling in the prime,
    To hide amongst his lilies, while once more
    She took her casement seat that overlooked
    The sea and read in Master Spenser's book,
    Which Francis gave "To my dear lady and queen
    Bess," that most rare processional of love--
    "_Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song!_"
    Yet did her father urge her day by day,
    And day by day her mother dinned her ears
    With petty saws, as--"When _I_ was a girl,"
    And "I remember what _my_ father said,"
    And "Love, oh feather-fancies plucked from geese
    You call your poets!" Yet she hardly meant
    To slight true love, save in her daughter's heart;
    For the old folk ever find it hard to see
    The passion of their children. When it wakes,
    The child becomes a stranger. So with Bess;
    But since her soul still slumbered, and the moons
    Rolled on and blurred her soul's particular love
    With the vague unknown impulse of her youth,
    Her brave resistance often melted now
    In tears, and her will weakened day by day;
    Till on a dreadful summer morn there came,
    Borne by a wintry flaw, home to the Thames,
    A bruised and battered ship, all that was left,
    So said her crew, of Drake's ill-fated fleet.
    John Wynter, her commander, told the tale
    Of how the _Golden Hynde_ and _Marygold_
    Had by the wind Euroclydon been driven
    Sheer o'er the howling edges of the world;
    Of how himself by God's good providence
    Was hurled into the strait Magellanus;
    Of how on the horrible frontiers of the Void
    He had watched in vain, lit red with beacon-fires
    The desperate coasts o' the black abyss, whence none
    Ever returned, though many a week he watched
    Beneath the Cross; and only saw God's wrath
    Burn through the heavens and devastate the mountains,
    And hurl unheard of oceans roaring down
    After the lost ships in one cataract
    Of thunder and splendour and fury and rolling doom.

    Then, with a bitter triumph in his face,
    As if this were the natural end of all
    Such vile plebeians, as if he had foreseen it,
    As if himself had breathed a tactful hint
    Into the aristocratic ears of God,
    Her father broke the last frail barriers down,
    Broke the poor listless will o' the lonely girl,
    Who careless now of aught but misery
    Promised to wed their lordling. Mighty speed
    They made to press that loveless marriage on;
    And ere the May had mellowed into June
    Her marriage eve had come. Her cold hands held
    Drake's gift. She scarce could see her name, writ broad
    By that strong hand as it was, _To my queen Bess_.
    She looked out through her casement o'er the sea,
    Listening its old enchanted moan, which seemed
    Striving to speak, she knew not what. Its breath
    Fluttered the roses round the grey old walls,
    And shook the ghostly jasmine. A great moon
    Hung like a red lamp in the sycamore.
    A corn-crake in the hay-fields far away
    Chirped like a cricket, and the night-jar churred
    His passionate love-song. Soft-winged moths besieged
    Her lantern. Under many a star-stabbed elm
    The nightingale began his golden song,
    Whose warm thick notes are each a drop of blood
    From that small throbbing breast against the thorn
    Pressed close to turn the white rose into red;
    Even as her lawn-clad may-white bosom pressed
    Quivering against the bars, while her dark hair
    Streamed round her shoulders and her small bare feet
    Gleamed in the dusk. Then spake she to her maid--
    "I cannot sleep, I cannot sleep to-night.
    Bring thy lute hither and sing. Alison, think you
    The dead can watch us from their distant world?
    Can our dead friends be near us when we weep?
    I wish 'twere so! for then my love would come,
    No matter then how far, my love would come,
    And he'd forgive me."

    Then Bess bowed down her lovely head: her breast
    Heaved with short sobs, sickening at the heart,
    She grasped the casement moaning, "Love, Love, Love,
    Come quickly, come, before it is too late,
    Come quickly, oh come quickly."
                                        Then her maid
    Slipped a soft arm around her and gently drew
    The supple quivering body, shaken with sobs,
    And all that firm young, sweetness to her breast,
    And led her to her couch, and all night long
    She watched beside her, till the marriage morn
    Blushed in the heartless East. Then swiftly flew
    The pitiless moments, till--as in a dream--
    And borne along by dreams, or like a lily
    Cut from its anchorage in the stream to glide
    Down the smooth bosom of an unknown world
    Through fields of unknown blossom, so moved Bess
    Amongst her maids, as the procession passed
    Forth to the little church upon the cliffs,
    And, as in those days was the bridal mode,
    Her lustrous hair in billowing beauty streamed
    Dishevelled o'er her shoulders, while the sun
    Caressed her bent and glossy head, and shone
    Over the deep blue, white-flaked, wrinkled sea,
    On full-blown rosy-petalled sails that flashed
    Like flying blossoms fallen from her crown.


BOOK V


    I

    _With the fruit of Aladdin's garden clustering thick in her hold,
    With rubies awash in her scuppers and her bilge ablaze with gold,
    A world in arms behind her to sever her heart from home,
    The_ Golden Hynde _drove onward over the glittering foam._


    II

    _If we go as we came, by the Southward, we meet wi' the fleets of Spain!
    'Tis a thousand to one against us: we'll turn to the West again!
    We have captured a China pilot, his charts and his golden keys:
    We'll sail to the golden Gateway, over the golden seas._

    Over the immeasurable molten gold
    Wrapped in a golden haze, onward they drew;
    And now they saw the tiny purple quay
    Grow larger and darker and brighten into brown
    Across the swelling sparkle of the waves.
    Brown on the quay, a train of tethered mules
    Munched at the nose-bags, while a Spaniard drowsed
    On guard beside what seemed at first a heap
    Of fish, then slowly turned to silver bars
    Up-piled and glistering in the enchanted sun.
    Nor did that sentry wake as, like a dream,
    The _Golden Hynde_ divided the soft sleep
    Of warm green lapping water, sidled up,
    Sank sail, and moored beside the quay. But Drake,
    Lightly leaping ashore and stealing nigh,
    Picked up the Spaniard's long gay-ribboned gun
    Close to his ear. At once, without a sound,
    The watchman opened his dark eyes and stared
    As at strange men who suddenly had come,
    Borne by some magic carpet, from the stars;
    Then, with a courtly bow, his right hand thrust
    Within the lace embroideries of his breast.
    Politely Drake, with pained apologies
    For this disturbance of a cavalier
    Napping on guard, straightway resolved to make
    Complete amends, by now relieving him
    Of these--which doubtless troubled his repose--
    These anxious bars of silver. With that word
    Two seamen leaped ashore and, gathering up
    The bars in a stout old patch of tawny sail,
    Slung them aboard. No sooner this was done
    Than out o' the valley, like a foolish jest
    Out of the mouth of some great John-a-dreams,
    In soft procession of buffoonery
    A woolly train of llamas proudly came
    Stepping by two and two along the quay,
    Laden with pack on pack of silver bars
    And driven by a Spaniard. His amaze
    The seamen greeted with profuser thanks
    For his most punctual thought and opportune
    Courtesy. None the less they must avouch
    It pained them much to see a cavalier
    Turned carrier; and, at once, they must insist
    On easing him of that too sordid care.

       *   *   *   *

    Then out from Tarapaca once again
    They sailed, their hold a glimmering mine of wealth,
    Towards Arica and Lima, where they deemed
    The prize of prizes waited unaware.
    For every year a gorgeous galleon sailed
    With all the harvest of Potosi's mines
    And precious stones from dead king's diadems,
    Aztecs' and Incas' gem-encrusted crowns,
    Pearls from the glimmering Temples of the Moon,
    Rich opals with their milky rainbow-clouds,
    White diamonds from the Temples of the Sun,
    Carbuncles flaming scarlet, amethysts,
    Rubies, and sapphires; these to Spain she brought
    To glut her priestly coffers. Now not far
    Ahead they deemed she lay upon that coast,
    Crammed with the lustrous Indies, wrung with threat
    And torture from the naked Indian slaves.
    To him that spied her top-sails first a prize
    Drake offered of the wondrous chain he wore;
    And every seaman, every ship-boy, watched
    Not only for the prize, but for their friends,
    If haply these had weathered through the storm.
    Nor did they know their friends had homeward turned,
    Bearing to England and to England's Queen,
    And his heart's queen, the tale that Drake was dead.

    Northward they cruised along a warm, wild coast
    That like a most luxurious goddess drowsed
    Supine to heaven, her arms behind her head,
    One knee up-thrust to make a mountain-peak,
    Her rosy breasts up-heaving their soft snow
    In distant Andes, and her naked side
    With one rich curve for half a hundred leagues
    Bathed by the creaming foam; her heavy hair
    Fraught with the perfume of a thousand forests
    Tossed round about her beauty: and her mouth
    A scarlet mystery of distant flower
    Up-turned to take the kisses of the sun.
    But like a troop of boys let loose from school
    The adventurers went by, startling the stillness
    Of that voluptuous dream-encumbered shore
    With echoing shouts of laughter and alien song.

    But as they came to Arica, from afar
    They heard the clash of bells upon the breeze,
    And knew that Rumour with her thousand wings
    Had rushed before them. Horsemen in the night
    Had galloped through the white coast-villages
    And spread the dreadful cry "El Draque!" abroad,
    And when the gay adventurers drew nigh
    They found the quays deserted, and the ships
    All flown, except one little fishing-boat
    Wherein an old man like a tortoise moved
    A wrinkled head above the rusty net
    His crawling hands repaired. He seemed to dwell
    Outside the world of war and peace, outside
    Everything save his daily task, and cared
    No whit who else might win or lose; for all
    The pilot asked of him without demur
    He answered, scarcely looking from his work.
    A galleon laden with eight hundred bars
    Of silver, not three hours ago had flown
    Northward, he muttered. Ere the words were out,
    The will of Drake thrilled through the _Golden Hynde_
    Like one sharp trumpet-call, and ere they knew
    What power impelled them, crowding on all sail
    Northward they surged, and roaring down the wind
    At Chiuli, port of Arequipa, saw
    The chase at anchor. Wondering they came
    With all the gunners waiting at their guns
    Bare-armed and silent--nearer, nearer yet,--
    Close to the enemy. But no sight or sound
    Of living creature stirred upon her decks.
    Only a great grey cat lay in the sun
    Upon a warm smooth cannon-butt. A chill
    Ran through the veins of even the boldest there
    At that too peaceful silence. Cautiously
    Drake neared her in his pinnace: cautiously,
    Cutlass in hand, up that mysterious hull
    He clomb, and wondered, as he climbed, to breathe
    The friendly smell o' the pitch and hear the waves
    With their incessant old familiar sound
    Crackling and slapping against her windward flank.
    A ship of dreams was that; for when they reached
    The silent deck, they saw no crouching forms,
    They heard no sound of life. Only the hot
    Creak of the cordage whispered in the sun.
    The cat stood up and yawned, and slunk away
    Slowly, with furtive glances. The great hold
    Was empty, and the rich cabin stripped and bare.
    Suddenly one of the seamen with a cry
    Pointed where, close inshore, a little boat
    Stole towards the town; and, with a louder cry,
    Drake bade his men aboard the _Golden Hynde_.
    Scarce had they pulled two hundred yards away
    When, with a roar that seemed to buffet the heavens
    And rip the heart of the sea out, one red flame
    Blackened with fragments, the great galleon burst
    Asunder! All the startled waves were strewn
    With wreckage; and Drake laughed--
    "My lads, we have diced
    With death to-day, and won! My merry lads,
    It seems that Spain is bolting with the stakes!
    Now, if I have to stretch the skies for sails
    And summon the blasts of God up from the South
    To fill my canvas, I will overhaul
    Those dusky devils with the treasure-ship
    That holds our hard-earned booty. Pull hard all,
    Hard for the _Golden Hynde_."

       *   *   *   *

                                    And so they came
    At dead of night on Callao de Lima!
    They saw the harbour lights across the waves
    Glittering, and the shadowy hulks of ships
    Gathered together like a flock of sheep
    Within the port. With shouts and clink of chains
    A shadowy ship was entering from the North,
    And like the shadow of that shadow slipped
    The _Golden Hynde_ beside her thro' the gloom;
    And side by side they anchored in the port
    Amidst the shipping! Over the dark tide
    A small boat from the customs-house drew near.
    A sleepy, yawning, gold-laced officer
    Boarded the _Golden Hynde_, and with a cry,
    Stumbling against a cannon-butt, he saw
    The bare-armed British seamen in the gloom
    All waiting by their guns. Wildly he plunged
    Over the side and urged his boat away,
    Crying, "El Draque! El Draque!" At that dread word
    The darkness filled with clamour, and the ships,
    Cutting their cables, drifted here and there
    In mad attempts to seek the open sea.
    Wild lights burnt hither and thither, and all the port,
    One furnace of confusion, heaved and seethed
    In terror; for each shadow of the night,
    Nay, the great night itself, was all _El Draque_.
    The Dragon's wings were spread from quay to quay,
    The very lights that burnt from mast to mast
    And flared across the tide kindled his breath
    To fire; while here and there a British pinnace
    Slipped softly thro' the roaring gloom and glare,
    Ransacking ship by ship; for each one thought
    A fleet had come upon them. Each gave up
    The struggle as each was boarded; while, elsewhere,
    Cannon to cannon, friends bombarded friends.

    Yet not one ounce of treasure in Callao
    They found; for, fourteen days before they came,
    That greatest treasure-ship of Spain, with all
    The gorgeous harvest of that year, had sailed
    For Panama: her ballast--silver bars;
    Her cargo--rubies, emeralds, and gold.

    Out through the clamour and the darkness, out,
    Out to the harbour mouth, the _Golden Hynde_,
    Steered by the iron soul of Drake, returned:
    And where the way was blocked, her cannon clove
    A crimson highway to the midnight sea.
    Then Northward, Northward, o'er the jewelled main,
    Under the white moon like a storm they drove
    In quest of the _Cacafuego_. Fourteen days
    Her start was; and at dawn the fair wind sank,
    And chafing lay the _Golden Hynde_, becalmed;
    While, on the hills, the Viceroy of Peru
    Marched down from Lima with two thousand men,
    And sent out four huge ships of war to sink
    Or capture the fierce Dragon. Loud laughed Drake
    To see them creeping nigh, urged with great oars,
    Then suddenly pause; for none would be the first
    To close with him. And, ere they had steeled their hearts
    To battle, a fair breeze broke out anew,
    And Northward sped the little _Golden Hynde_
    In quest of the lordliest treasure-ship of Spain.

       *   *   *   *

    Behind her lay a world in arms; for now
    Wrath and confusion clamoured for revenge
    From sea to sea. Spain claimed the pirate's head
    From England, and awaited his return
    With all her tortures. And where'er he passed
    He sowed the dragon's teeth, and everywhere
    Cadmean broods of armèd men arose
    And followed, followed on his fiery trail.
    Men toiled at Lima to fit out a fleet
    Grim enough to destroy him. All night long
    The flare went up from cities on the coast
    Where men like naked devils toiled to cast
    Cannon that might have overwhelmed the powers
    Of Michael when he drave that hideous rout
    Through livid chaos to the black abyss.
    Small hope indeed there seemed of safe return;
    But Northward sped the little _Golden Hynde_,
    The world-watched midget ship of eighteen guns,
    Undaunted; and upon the second dawn
    Sighted a galleon, not indeed the chase,
    Yet worth a pause; for out of her they took--
    Embossed with emeralds large as pigeon's eggs--
    A golden crucifix, with eighty pounds
    In weight of gold. The rest they left behind;
    And onward, onward, to the North they flew--
    A score of golden miles, a score of green,
    An hundred miles, eight hundred miles of foam,
    Rainbows and fire, ransacking as they went
    Ship after ship for news o' the chase and gold;
    Learning from every capture that they drew
    Nearer and nearer. At Truxillo, dim
    And dreaming city, a-drowse with purple flowers,
    She had paused, ay, paused to take a freight of gold!
    At Paita--she had passed two days in front,
    Only two days, two days ahead; nay, one!
    At Quito, close inshore, a youthful page,
    Bright-eyed, ran up the rigging and cried, "A sail!
    A sail! The _Cacafuego_! And the chain
    Is mine!" And by the strange cut of her sails,
    Whereof they had been told in Callao,
    They knew her!
                          Heavily laden with her gems,
    Lazily drifting with her golden fruitage,
    Over the magic seas they saw her hull
    Loom as they onward drew; but Drake, for fear
    The prey might take alarm and run ashore,
    Trailed wine-skins, filled with water, over the side
    To hold his ship back, till the darkness fell,
    And with the night the off-shore wind arose.
    At last the sun sank down, the rosy light
    Faded from Andes' peaked and bosomed snow:
    The night-wind rose: the wine-skins were up-hauled;
    And, like a hound unleashed, the _Golden Hynde_
    Leapt forward thro' the gloom.
                                         A cable's length
    Divided them. The _Cacafuego_ heard
    A rough voice in the darkness bidding her
    _Heave to!_ She held her course. Drake gave the word.
    A broadside shattered the night, and over her side
    Her main-yard clattered like a broken wing!
    On to her decks the British sea-dogs swarmed,
    Cutlass in hand: that fight was at an end.

    The ship was cleared, a prize crew placed a-board,
    Then both ships turned their heads to the open sea.
    At dawn, being out of sight of land, they 'gan
    Examine the great prize. None ever knew
    Save Drake and Gloriana what wild wealth
    They had captured there. Thus much at least was known:
    An hundredweight of gold, and twenty tons
    Of silver bullion; thirteen chests of coins;
    Nuggets of gold unnumbered; countless pearls,
    Diamonds, emeralds; but the worth of these
    Was past all reckoning. In the crimson dawn,
    Ringed with the lonely pomp of sea and sky,
    The naked-footed seamen bathed knee-deep
    In gold and gathered up Aladdin's fruit--
    All-colored gems--and tossed them in the sun.
    The hold like one great elfin orchard gleamed
    With dusky globes and tawny glories piled,
    Hesperian apples, heap on mellow heap,
    Rich with the hues of sunset, rich and ripe
    And ready for the enchanted cider-press;
    An Emperor's ransom in each burning orb;
    A kingdom's purchase in each clustered bough;
    The freedom of all slaves in every chain.


BOOK VI

    Now like the soul of Ophir on the sea
    Glittered the _Golden Hynde_, and all her heart
    Turned home to England. As a child that finds
    A ruby ring upon the highway, straight
    Homeward desires to run with it, so she
    Yearned for her home and country. Yet the world
    Was all in arms behind her. Fleet on fleet
    Awaited her return. Along the coast
    The very churches melted down their chimes
    And cast them into cannon. To the South
    A thousand cannon watched Magellan's straits,
    And fleets were scouring all the sea like hounds,
    With orders that where'er they came on Drake,
    Although he were the Dragon of their dreams,
    They should out-blast his thunders and convey,
    Dead or alive, his body back to Spain.

    And Drake laughed out and said, "My trusty lads
    Of Devon, you have made the wide world ring
    With England's name; you have swept one half the seas
    From sky to sky; and in our oaken hold
    You have packed the gorgeous Indies. We shall sail
    But slowly with such wealth. If we return,
    We are one against ten thousand! We will seek
    The fabled Northern passage, take our gold
    Safe home; then out to sea again and try
    Our guns against their guns."

       *   *   *   *

                               And as they sailed
    Northward, they swooped on warm blue Guatulco
    For food and water. Nigh the dreaming port
    The grand alcaldes in high conclave sat,
    Blazing with gold and scarlet, as they tried
    A batch of negro slaves upon the charge
    Of idleness in Spanish mines; dumb slaves,
    With bare scarred backs and labour-broken knees,
    And sorrowful eyes like those of wearied kine
    Spent from the ploughing. Even as the judge
    Rose to condemn them to the knotted lash
    The British boat's crew, quiet and compact,
    Entered the court. The grim judicial glare
    Grew wider with amazement, and the judge
    Staggered against his gilded throne.
                                          "I thank
    Almighty God," cried Drake, "who hath given me this
    --That I who once, in ignorance, procured
    Slaves for the golden bawdy-house of Spain,
    May now, in England's name, help to requite
    That wrong. For now I say in England's name,
    Where'er her standard flies, the slave shall stand
    Upright, the shackles fall from off his limbs.
    Unyoke the prisoners: tell them they are men
    Once more, not beasts of burden. Set them free;
    But take these gold and scarlet popinjays
    Aboard my _Golden Hynde_; and let them write
    An order that their town shall now provide
    My boats with food and water."
                                      This being done,
    The slaves being placed in safety on the prize,
    The _Golden Hynde_ revictualled and the casks
    Replenished with fresh water, Drake set free
    The judges and swept Northward once again;
    And, off the coast of Nicaragua, found
    A sudden treasure better than all gold;
    For on the track of the China trade they caught
    A ship whereon two China pilots sailed,
    And in their cabin lay the secret charts,
    Red hieroglyphs of Empire, unknown charts
    Of silken sea-roads down the golden West
    Where all roads meet and East and West are one.
    And, with that mystery stirring in their hearts
    Like a strange cry from home, Northward they swept
    And Northward, till the soft luxurious coasts
    Hardened, the winds grew bleak, the great green waves
    Loomed high like mountains round them, and the spray
    Froze on their spars and yards. Fresh from the warmth
    Of tropic seas the men could hardly brook
    That cold; and when the floating hills of ice
    Like huge green shadows crowned with ghostly snow
    Went past them with strange whispers in the gloom,
    Or took mysterious colours in the dawn,
    Their hearts misgave them, and they found no way;
    But all was iron shore and icy sea.
    And one by one the crew fell sick to death
    In that fierce winter, and the land still ran
    Westward and showed no passage. Tossed with storms,
    Onward they plunged, or furrowed gentler tides
    Of ice-lit emerald that made the prow
    A faery beak of some enchanted ship
    Flinging wild rainbows round her as she drove
    Thro' seas unsailed by mortal mariners,
    Past isles unhailed of any human voice,
    Where sound and silence mingled in one song
    Of utter solitude. Ever as they went
    The flag of England blazoned the broad breeze,
    Northward, where never ship had sailed before,
    Northward, till lost in helpless wonderment,
    Dazed as a soul awakening from the dream
    Of death to some wild dawn in Paradise
    (Yet burnt with cold as they whose very tears
    Freeze on their faces where Cocytus wails)
    All world-worn, bruised, wing-broken, wracked, and wrenched,
    Blackened with lightning, scarred as with evil deeds,
    But all embalmed in beauty by that sun
    Which never sets, bosomed in peace at last
    The _Golden Hynde_ rocked on a glittering calm.
    Seas that no ship had ever sailed, from sky
    To glistening sky, swept round them. Glory and gleam,
    Glamour and lucid rapture and diamond air
    Embraced her broken spars, begrimed with gold
    Her gloomy hull, rocking upon a sphere
    New made, it seemed, mysterious with the first
    Mystery of the world, where holy sky
    And sacred sea shone like the primal Light
    Of God, a-stir with whispering sea-bird's wings
    And glorious with clouds. Only, all day,
    All night, the rhythmic utterance of His will
    In the deep sigh of seas that washed His throne,
    Rose and relapsed across Eternity,
    Timed to the pulse of æons. All their world
    Seemed strange as unto us the great new heavens
    And glittering shores, if on some aery bark
    To Saturn's coasts we came and traced no more
    The tiny gleam of our familiar earth
    Far off, but heard tremendous oceans roll
    Round unimagined continents, and saw
    Terrible mountains unto which our Alps
    Were less than mole-hills, and such gaunt ravines
    Cleaving them and such cataracts roaring down
    As burst the gates of our earth-moulded senses,
    Pour the eternal glory on our souls,
    And, while ten thousand chariots bring the dawn,
    Hurl us poor midgets trembling to our knees.
    Glory and glamour and rapture of lucid air,
    Ice cold, with subtle colours of the sky
    Embraced her broken spars, belted her hulk
    With brilliance, while she dipped her jacinth beak
    In waves of mounded splendour, and sometimes
    A great ice-mountain flashed and floated by
    Throned on the waters, pinnacled and crowned
    With all the smouldering jewels in the world;
    Or in the darkness, glimmering berg on berg,
    All emerald to the moon, went by like ghosts
    Whispering to the South.
                                 There, as they lay,
    Waiting a wind to fill the stiffened sails,
    Their hearts remembered that in England now
    The Spring was nigh, and in that lonely sea
    The skilled musicians filled their eyes with home.


SONG

    I

    _It is the Spring-tide now!
    Under the hawthorn-bough
      The milkmaid goes:
    Her eyes are violets blue
    Washed with the morning dew,
      Her mouth a rose.
        It is the Spring-tide now._


    II

    _The lanes are growing sweet,
    The lambkins frisk and bleat
      In all the meadows:
    The glossy dappled kine
    Blink in the warm sunshine,
      Cooling their shadows.
        It is the Spring-tide now._


    III

    _Soon hand in sunburnt hand
    Thro' God's green fairyland,
      England, our home,
    Whispering as they stray
    Adown the primrose way,
      Lovers will roam.
        It is the Spring-tide now._

    And then, with many a chain of linkèd sweetness,
    Harmonious gold, they drew their hearts and souls
    Back, back to England, thoughts of wife and child,
    Mother and sweetheart and the old companions,
    The twisted streets of London and the deep
    Delight of Devon lanes, all softly voiced
    In words or cadences, made them breathe hard
    And gaze across the everlasting sea,
    Craving for that small isle so far away.


SONG

    I

    _O, you beautiful land,
      Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright
        With the flowery largesse of May
    Sweet from the palm of her hand
      Out-flung, till the hedges grew white
        As the green-arched billows with spray._


    II

    White from the fall of her feet
      The daisies awake in the sun!
        Cliff-side and valley and plain
    With the breath of the thyme growing sweet
      Laugh, for the Spring is begun;
        And Love hath turned homeward again.

            _O, you beautiful land!_


    III

    Where should the home be of Love,
      But there, where the hawthorn-tree blows,
        And the milkmaid trips out with her pail,
    And the skylark in heaven above
      Sings, till the West is a rose
        And the East is a nightingale?

            _O, you beautiful land!_


    IV

    There where the sycamore trees
      Are shading the satin-skinned kine,
        And oaks, whose brethren of old
    Conquered the strength of the seas,
      Grow broad in the sunlight and shine
        Crowned with their cressets of gold;

            _O, you beautiful land!_


    V

    Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright
      With rose-coloured cloudlets above;
        Billowing broad and grand
    Where the meadows with blossom are white
      For the foot-fall, the foot-fall of Love.
        O, you beautiful land!


    VI

    How should we sing of thy beauty,
      England, mother of men,
        We that can look in thine eyes
    And see there the splendour of duty
      Deep as the depth of their ken,
        Wide as the ring of thy skies.


    VII

    _O, you beautiful land,
      Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright
        With the flowery largesse of May
    Sweet from the palm of her hand
      Out-flung, till the hedges grew white
        As the green-arched billows with spray,
            O, you beautiful land!_

    And when a fair wind rose again, there seemed
    No hope of passage by that fabled way
    Northward, and suddenly Drake put down his helm
    And, with some wondrous purpose in his eyes,
    Turned Southward once again, until he found
    A lonely natural harbour on the coast
    Near San Francisco, where the cliffs were white
    Like those of England, and the soft soil teemed
    With gold. There they careened the _Golden Hynde_--
    Her keel being thick with barnacles and weeds--
    And built a fort and dockyard to refit
    Their little wandering home, not half so large
    As many a coasting barque to-day that scarce
    Would cross the Channel, yet she had swept the seas
    Of half the world, and even now prepared
    For new adventures greater than them all.
    And as the sound of chisel and hammer broke
    The stillness of that shore, shy figures came,
    Keen-faced and grave-eyed Indians, from the woods
    To bow before the strange white-faced newcomers
    As gods. Whereat the chaplain all aghast
    Persuaded them with signs and broken words
    And grunts that even Drake was but a man,
    Whom none the less the savages would crown
    With woven flowers and barbarous ritual
    King of New Albion--so the seamen called
    That land, remembering the white cliffs of home.
    Much they implored, with many a sign and cry,
    Which by the rescued slaves upon the prize
    Were part interpreted, that Drake would stay
    And rule them; and the vision of the great
    Empire of Englishmen arose and flashed
    A moment round them, on that lonely shore.
    A small and weather-beaten band they stood,
    Bronzed seamen by the laughing rescued slaves,
    Ringed with gigantic loneliness and saw
    An Empire that should liberate the world;
    A Power before the lightning of whose arms
    Darkness should die and all oppression cease;
    A Federation of the strong and weak,
    Whereby the weak were strengthened and the strong
    Made stronger in the increasing good of all;
    A gathering up of one another's loads;
    A turning of the wasteful rage of war
    To accomplish large and fruitful tasks of peace,
    Even as the strength of some great stream is turned
    To grind the corn for bread. E'en thus on England
    That splendour dawned which those in dreams foresaw
    And saw not with their living eyes, but thou,
    England, mayst lift up eyes at last and see,
    Who, like that angel of the Apocalypse
    Hast set one foot upon thy sea-girt isle,
    The other upon the waters, and canst raise
    Now, if thou wilt, above the assembled nations,
    The trumpet of deliverance to thy lips.

       *   *   *   *

    At last their task was done, the _Golden Hynde_
    Undocked, her white wings hoisted; and away
    Westward they swiftly glided from the shore
    Where, with a wild lament, their Indian friends,
    Knee-deep i' the creaming foam, all stood at gaze,
    Like men that for one moment in their lives
    Have seen a mighty drama cross their path
    And played upon the stage of vast events
    Knowing, henceforward, all their life is nought.
    But Westward sped the little _Golden Hynde_
    Across the uncharted ocean, with no guide
    But that great homing cry of all their hearts.
    Far out of sight of land they steered, straight out
    Across the great Pacific, in those days
    When even the compass proved no trusty guide,
    Straight out they struck in that small bark, straight out
    Week after week, without one glimpse of aught
    But heaving seas, across the uncharted waste
    Straight to the sunset. Laughingly they sailed,
    With all that gorgeous booty in their holds,
    A splendour dragging deep through seas of doom,
    A prey to the first great hurricane that blew
    Except their God averted it. And still
    Their skilled musicians cheered the way along
    To shores beyond the sunset and the sea.
    And oft at nights, the yellow fo'c'sle lanthorn
    Swung over swarthy singing faces grouped
    Within the four small wooden walls that made
    Their home and shut them from the unfathomable
    Depths of mysterious gloom without that rolled
    All around them; or Tom Moone would heartily troll
    A simple stave that struggled oft with thoughts
    Beyond its reach, yet reached their hearts no less.


SONG


    I

    _Good luck befall you, mariners all
      That sail this world so wide!
    Whither we go, not yet we know:
      We steer by wind and tide,
    Be it right or wrong, I sing this song;
      For now it seems to me
    Men steer their souls thro' rocks and shoals
      As mariners use by sea._

    Chorus: _As mariners use by sea,
                           My lads,
            As mariners use by sea!_


    II

    _And now they plough to windward, now
      They drive before the gale!
    Now are they hurled across the world
      With torn and tattered sail;
    Yet, as they will, they steer and still
      Defy the world's rude glee:
    Till death o'erwhelm them, mast and helm,
      They ride and rule the sea._

    Chorus: _They ride and rule the sea,
                      My lads,
            They ride and rule the sea!_

       *   *   *   *

    Meantime, in England, Bess of Sydenham,
    Drake's love and queen, being told that Drake was dead,
    And numbed with grief, obeying her father's will
    That dreadful summer morn in bridal robes
    Had passed to wed her father's choice. The sun
    Streamed smiling on her as she went, half-dazed,
    Amidst her smiling maids. Nigh to the sea
    The church was, and the mellow marriage bells
    Mixed with its music. Far away, white sails
    Spangled the sapphire, white as flying blossoms
    New-fallen from her crown; but as the glad
    And sad procession neared the little church,
    From some strange ship-of-war, far out at sea,
    There came a sudden tiny puff of smoke--
    And then a dull strange throb, a whistling hiss,
    And scarce a score of yards away a shot
    Ploughed up the turf. None knew, none ever knew
    From whence it came, whether a perilous jest
    Of English seamen, or a wanton deed
    Of Spaniards, or mere accident; but all
    Her maids in flight were scattered. Bess awoke
    As from a dream, crying aloud--"'Tis he,
    'Tis he that sends this message. He is not dead.
    I will not pass the porch. Come home with me.
    'Twas he that sent that message."
                                        Nought availed,
    Her father's wrath, her mother's tears, her maids'
    Cunning persuasions, nought; home she returned,
    And waited for the dead to come to life;
    Nor waited long; for ere that month was out,
    Rumour on rumour reached the coasts of England,
    Borne as it seemed on sea-birds' wings, that Drake
    Was on his homeward way.


BOOK VII

    The imperial wrath of Spain, one world-wide sea
    Of furious pomp and flouted power, now surged
    All round this little isle, with one harsh roar
    Deepening for Drake's return--"The _Golden Hynde_
    Ye swore had foundered, Drake ye swore was drowned;
    They are on their homeward way! The head of Drake!
    What answer, what account, what recompense
    Now can ye yield our might invincible
    Except the head of Drake, whose bloody deeds
    Have reddened the Pacific, who hath sacked
    Cities of gold, burnt fleets, and ruined realms,
    What answer but his life?"
                               To which the Queen
    Who saw the storm of Europe slowly rising
    In awful menace o'er her wave-beat throne,
    And midmost of the storm, the ensanguined robes
    Of Rome and murderous hand, grasping the Cross
    By its great hilt, pointing it like a brand
    Blood-blackened at the throat of England, saw
    Like skeleton castles wrapt in rolling mist
    The monstrous engines and designs of war,
    The secret fleets and brooding panoplies
    Philip prepared, growing from day to day
    In dusk armipotent and embattled gloom
    Surrounding her, replied: "The life of Drake,
    If, on our strict enquiry, in due order
    We find that Drake have hurt our friends, mark well,
    If Drake have hurt our friends, the life of Drake."

       *   *   *   *

    And while the world awaited him, as men
    Might wait an earthquake, quietly one grey morn,
    One grey October morn of mist and rain
    When all the window-panes in Plymouth dripped
    With listless drizzle, and only through her streets
    Rumbled the death-cart with its dreary bell
    Monotonously plangent (for the plague
    Had lately like a vampire sucked the veins
    Of Plymouth town), a little weed-clogged ship,
    Grey as a ghost, glided into the Sound
    And anchored, scarce a soul to see her come,
    And not an eye to read the faded scroll
    Around her battered prow--the _Golden Hynde_.
    Then, thro' the dumb grey misty listless port,
    A rumour like the colours of the dawn
    Streamed o'er the shining quays, up the wet streets,
    In at the tavern doors, flashed from the panes
    And turned them into diamonds, fired the pools
    In every muddy lane with Spanish gold,
    Flushed in a thousand faces, Drake is come!
    Down every crowding alley the urchins leaped
    Tossing their caps, the _Golden Hynde_ is come!
    Fisherman, citizen, prentice, dame and maid,
    Fat justice, floury baker, bloated butcher,
    Fishwife, minister and apothecary,
    Yea, even the driver of the death-cart, leaving
    His ghastly load, using his dreary bell
    To merrier purpose, down the seething streets,
    Panting, tumbling, jostling, helter-skelter
    To the water-side, to the water-side they rushed,
    And some knee-deep beyond it, all one wild
    Welcome to Francis Drake!
    Wild kerchiefs fluttering, thunderous hurrahs
    Rolling from quay to quay, a thousand arms
    Outstretched to that grey ghostly little ship
    At whose masthead the British flag still flew;
    Then, over all, in one tumultuous tide
    Of pealing joy, the Plymouth bells outclashed
    A nation's welcome home to Francis Drake.

    The very _Golden Hynde_, no idle dream,
    The little ship that swept the Spanish Main,
    Carelessly lying there, in Plymouth Sound,
    The _Golden Hynde_, the wonder of the world,
    A glory wrapt her greyness, and no boat
    Dared yet approach, save one, with Drake's close friends,
    Who came to warn him: "England stands alone
    And Drake is made the price of England's peace.
    The Queen, perforce, must temporise with Spain,
    The Invincible! She hath forfeited thy life
    To Spain, against her will. Only by this
    Rejection of thee as a privateer
    She averted instant war; for now the menace
    Of Spain draws nigher, looms darker every hour.
    The world is made Spain's footstool. Philip, the King,
    E'en now hath added to her boundless power
    Without a blow, the vast domains and wealth
    Of Portugal, and deadlier yet, a coast
    That crouches over against us. Cadiz holds
    A huge Armada, none knows where to strike;
    And even this day a flying horseman brought
    Rumours that Spain hath landed a great force
    In Ireland. Mary of Scotland only waits
    The word to stab us in the side for Rome.
    The Queen, weighed down by Burleigh and the friends
    Of peace at any cost, may yet be driven
    To make thy life our ransom, which indeed
    She hath already sworn, or seemed to swear."

    To whom Drake answered, "Gloriana lives;
    And in her life mine only fear lies dead,
    Mine only fear, for England, not myself.
    Willing am I and glad, as I have lived,
    To die for England's sake.
    Yet, lest the Queen be driven now to restore
    This cargo that I bring her--a world's wealth,
    The golden springs of all the power of Spain,
    The jewelled hearts of all those cruel realms
    (For I have plucked them out) beyond the sea;
    Lest she be driven to yield them up again
    For Spain and Spain's delight, I will warp out
    Behind St. Nicholas' Island. The fierce plague
    In Plymouth shall be colour and excuse,
    Until my courier return from court
    With Gloriana's will. If it be death,
    I'll out again to sea, strew its rough floor
    With costlier largesses than kings can throw,
    And, ere I die, will singe the Spaniard's beard
    And set the fringe of his imperial robe
    Blazing along his coasts. Then let him roll
    His galleons round the little _Golden Hynde_,
    Bring her to bay, if he can, on the high seas,
    Ring us about with thousands, we'll not yield,
    I and my _Golden Hynde_, we will go down,
    With flag still flying on the last stump left us
    And all my cannon spitting out the fires
    Of everlasting scorn into his face."

    So Drake warped out the _Golden Hynde_ anew
    Behind St. Nicholas' Island. She lay there,
    The small grey-golden centre of the world
    That raged all round her, the last hope, the star
    Of Protestant freedom, she, the outlawed ship
    Holding within her the great head and heart
    Of England's ocean power; and all the fleets
    That have enfranchised earth, in that small ship,
    Lay waiting for their doom.
                                   Past her at night
    Fisher-boats glided, wondering as they heard
    In the thick darkness the great songs they deemed
    Must oft have risen from many a lonely sea;
    For oft had Spaniards brought a rumour back
    Of that strange pirate who in royal state
    Sailed to a sound of violins, and dined
    With skilled musicians round him, turning all
    Battle and storm and death into a song.


SONG

    The same Sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other
          Wherever we be;
    With the same hope before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Ringed round with the sea.

    No land in the ring of it
      Now, all around us
        Only the splendid
          Re-surging unknown;
    How should we sing of it,
      This that hath found us
        By the great stars attended
          At midnight, alone?

    Our highway none knoweth,
      Yet our blood hath discerned it!
        Clear, clear is our path now
          Whose foreheads are free
    Where the hurricane bloweth
      Our spirits have learned it,
        'Tis the highway of wrath, now,
          The storm's way, the sea.

    When the waters lay breathless
      Gazing at Hesper
        Guarding that glorious
          Fruitage of gold,
    Heard we the deathless
      Wonderful whisper
        We follow, victorious
          To-night, as of old.

    Ah, the broad miles of it
      White with the onset
        Of waves without number
          Warring for glee;
    Ah, the soft smiles of it
      Down to the sunset,
        Sacred for slumber
          The swan's bath, the sea!

    When the breakers charged thundering
      In thousands all round us
        With a lightning of lances
          Up-hurtled on high,
    When the stout ships were sundering
      A rapture hath crowned us
        Like the wild light that dances
          On the crests that flash by.

    _Our highway none knoweth,
      Yet our blood hath discerned it!
        Clear, clear is our path now
          Whose foreheads are free,
    Where Euroclydon bloweth
      Our spirits have learned it,
        'Tis the highway of wrath, now,
          The storm's way, the sea!_

    Who now will follow us
      Where England's flag leadeth us,
        Where gold not inveigles,
          Nor statesmen betray?
    Tho' the deep midnight swallow us
      Let her cry when she needeth us,
        We return, her sea-eagles,
          The hurricane's way.

    _For the same Sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other
          Wherever we be;
    With the same hope before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Ringed round with the sea._

    So six days passed, and on the seventh returned
    The courier, with a message from the Queen
    Summoning Drake to court, bidding him bring
    Also such curious trifles of his voyage
    As might amuse her, also be of good cheer
    She bade him, and rest well content his life
    In Gloriana's hands were safe: so Drake
    Laughingly landed with his war-bronzed crew
    Amid the wide-eyed throng on Plymouth beach
    And loaded twelve big pack-horses with pearls
    Beyond all price, diamonds, crosses of gold,
    Rubies that smouldered once for Aztec kings,
    And great dead Incas' gem-encrusted crowns.
    Also, he said, we'll add a sack or twain
    Of gold doubloons, pieces of eight, moidores,
    And such-like Spanish trash, for those poor lords
    At court, lilies that toil not neither spin,
    Wherefore, methinks their purses oft grow lean
    In these harsh times. 'Twere even as well their tongues
    Wagged in our favour, now, as in our blame.

       *   *   *   *

    Six days thereafter a fearful whisper reached
    Mendoza, plenipotentiary of Spain
    In London, that the pirate Drake was now
    In secret conference with the Queen, nay more,
    That he, the Master-thief of the golden world,
    Drake, even he, that bloody buccaneer,
    Had six hours' audience with her Majesty
    Daily, nay more, walked with her in her garden
    Alone, among the fiery Autumn leaves,
    Talking of God knows what, and suddenly
    The temporizing diplomatic voice
    Of caution he was wont to expect from England
    And blandly accept as his imperial due
    Changed to a ringing key of firm resolve,
    Resistance, nay, defiance. For when he came
    Demanding audience of the Queen, behold,
    Her officers of state with mouths awry
    Informed the high ambassador of Spain,
    Despite his pomp and circumstance, the Queen
    Could not receive him, being in conference
    With some rough seaman, pirate, what you will,
    A fellow made of bronze, a buccaneer,
    Maned like a lion, bearded like a pard,
    With hammered head, clamped jaws, and great deep eyes
    That burned with fierce blue colours of the brine,
    And liked not Spain--Drake! 'Twas the very name,
    One Francis Drake! a Titan that had stood,
    Thundering commands against the thundering heavens,
    On lightning-shattered, storm-swept decks and drunk
    Great draughts of glory from the rolling sea,
    El Draque! El Draque! Nor could she promise aught
    To Spain's ambassador, nor see his face
    Again, while yet one Spanish musketeer
    Remained in Ireland.
                        Vainly the Spaniard raged
    Of restitution, recompense; for now
    Had Drake brought up the little _Golden Hynde_
    To London, and the rumor of her wealth
    Out-topped the wild reality. The crew
    Were princes as they swaggered down the streets
    In weather-beaten splendour. Out of their doors
    To wonder and stare the jostling citizens ran
    When They went by; and through the length and breadth
    Of England, now, the gathering glory of life
    Shone like the dawn. O'er hill and dale it streamed,
    Dawn, everlasting and almighty dawn,
    Making a golden pomp of every oak--
    Had not its British brethren swept the seas?--
    In each remotest hamlet, by the hearth,
    The cart, the grey church-porch, the village pump
    By meadow and mill and old manorial hall,
    By turnpike and by tavern, farm and forge,
    Men staved the crimson vintage of romance
    And held it up against the light and drank it,
    And with it drank confusion to the wrath
    That menaced England, but eternal honour,
    While blood ran in their veins, to Francis Drake.


BOOK VIII

    Meanwhile, young Bess of Sydenham, the queen
    Of Drake's deep heart, emprisoned in her home,
    Fenced by her father's angry watch and ward
    Lest he--the poor plebeian dread of Spain,
    Shaker of nations, king of the untamed seas--
    Might win some word with her, sweet Bess, the flower
    Triumphant o'er their rusty heraldries,
    Waited her lover, as in ancient tales
    The pale princess from some grey wizard's tower
    Midmost the deep sigh of enchanted woods
    Looks for the starry flash of her knight's shield;
    Or on the further side o' the magic West
    Sees pushing through the ethereal golden gloom
    Some blurred black prow, with loaded colours coarse,
    Clouded with sunsets of a mortal sea,
    And rich with earthly crimson. She, with lips
    Apart, still waits the shattering golden thrill
    When it shall grate the coasts of Fairyland.

    Only, to Bess of Sydenham, there came
    No sight or sound to break that frozen spell
    And lonely watch, no message from her love,
    Or none that reached her restless helpless hands.
    Only the general rumour of the world
    Borne to her by the gossip of her maid
    Kept the swift pictures passing through her brain
    Of how the _Golden Hynde_ was hauled ashore
    At Deptford through a sea of exultation,
    And by the Queen's command was now set up
    For an everlasting memory!
    Of how the Queen with subtle statecraft still
    Kept Spain at arm's-length, dangling, while she played
    At fast and loose with France, whose embassy,
    Arriving with the marriage-treaty, found
    (And trembled at her daring, since the wrath
    Of Spain seemed, in their eyes, to flake with foam
    The storm-beat hulk) a gorgeous banquet spread
    To greet them on that very _Golden Hynde_
    Which sacked the Spanish main, a gorgeous feast,
    The like of which old England had not seen
    Since the bluff days of boisterous king Hal,
    Great shields of brawn with mustard, roasted swans,
    Haunches of venison, roasted chines of beef,
    And chewets baked, big olive-pyes thereto,
    And sallets mixed with sugar and cinnamon,
    White wine, rose-water, and candied eringoes.
    There, on the outlawed ship, whose very name
    Rang like a blasphemy in the imperial ears
    Of Spain (its every old worm-eaten plank
    Being scored with scorn and courage that not storm
    Nor death, nor all their Inquisition racks,
    The white-hot irons and bloody branding whips
    That scarred the backs of Rome's pale galley-slaves,
    Her captured English seamen, ever could daunt),
    There with huge Empires waiting for one word,
    One breath of colour and excuse, to leap
    Like wolves at the naked throat of her small isle,
    There in the eyes of the staggered world she stood,
    Great Gloriana, while the live decks reeled
    With flash of jewels and flush of rustling silks,
    She stood with Drake, the corsair, and her people
    Surged like a sea around. There did she give
    Open defiance with her agate smile
    To Spain. "Behold this pirate, now," she cried,
    "Whose head my Lord, the Invincible, Philip of Spain
    Demands from England. Kneel down, Master Drake,
    Kneel down; for now have I this gilded sword
    Wherewith to strike it off. Nay, thou my lord
    Ambassador of France, since I be woman,
    And squeamish at the sight of blood, give thou
    The accolade." With that jest she gave the hilt
    (Thus, even in boldness, playing a crafty part,
    And dangling France before the adventurous deed)
    To Marchaumont: and in the face of Europe,
    With that huge fleet in Cadiz and the whole
    World-power of Spain crouching around her isle,
    Knighted the master-thief of the unknown world,
    Sir Francis Drake.
                         And then the rumour came
    Of vaster privateerings planned by Drake
    Against the coasts of Philip; but held in check
    And fretting at the leash, as ever the Queen
    Clung to her statecraft, while Drake's enemies
    Worked in the dark against him. Spain had set
    An emperor's ransom on his life. At home
    John Doughty, treacherous brother of that traitor
    Who met his doom by Drake's own hand, intrigued
    With Spain abroad and Spain's dark emissaries
    At home to avenge his brother. Burleigh still
    Beset Drake's path with pitfalls: treacherous greed
    For Spain's blood-money daggered all the dark
    Around him, and John Doughty without cease
    Sought to make use of all; until, by chance,
    Drake gat the proof of treasonable intrigue
    With Spain, against him, up to the deadly hilt,
    And hurled him into the Tower.
                                      Many a night
    She sat by that old casement nigh the sea
    And heard its ebb and flow. With soul erect
    And splendid now she waited, yet there came
    No message; and, she thought, he hath seen at last
    My little worth. And when her maiden sang,
    With white throat throbbing softly in the dusk
    And fingers gently straying o'er the lute,
    As was her wont at twilight, some old song
    Of high disdainful queens and lovers pale
    Pining a thousand years before their feet,
    She thought, "O, if my lover loved me yet
    My heart would break for joy to welcome him:
    Perchance his true pride will not let him come
    Since false pride barred him out"; and yet again
    She burned with shame, thinking, "to him such pride
    Were matter for a jest. Ah no, he hath seen
    My little worth." Even so, one night she sat,
    One dark rich summer night, thinking him far
    Away, wrapped in the multitudinous cares
    Of one that seemed the steersman of the State
    Now, thro' the storm of Europe; while her maid
    Sang to the lute, and soft sea-breezes brought
    Wreathed scents and sighs of secret waves and flowers
    Warm through the casement's muffling jasmine bloom.


SONG


    I

    _Nymphs and naiads, come away,
                Love lies dead!
    Cover the cast-back golden head,
    Cover the lovely limbs with may,
        And with fairest boughs of green,
    And many a rose-wreathed briar spray;
        But let no hateful yew be seen
                Where Love lies dead._


    II

    _Let not the queen that would not hear,
                (Love lies dead!)
    Or beauty that refused to save.
        Exult in one dejected tear;
    But gather the glory of the year,
    The pomp and glory of the year,
    The triumphing glory of the year,
        And softly, softly, softly shed
    Its light and fragrance round the grave
                Where Love lies dead_.
    The song ceased. Far away the great sea slept,
    And all was very still. Only hard by
    One bird-throat poured its passion through the gloom,
    And the whole night breathlessly listened.
                                              A twig
    Snapped, the song ceased, the intense dumb night was all
    One passion of expectation--as if that song
    Were prelude, and ere long the heavens and earth
    Would burst into one great triumphant psalm.
    The song ceased only as if that small bird-throat
    Availed no further. Would the next great chord
    Ring out from harps in flaming seraph hands
    Ranged through the sky? The night watched, breathless, dumb.
    Bess listened. Once again a dry twig snapped
    Beneath her casement, and a face looked up,
    Draining her face of blood, of sight, of life,
    Whispering, a voice from far beyond the stars,
    Whispering, unutterable joy, the whole
    Glory of life and death in one small word--
    _Sweetheart!_
                   The jasmine at her casement shook,
    She knew no more than he was at her side,
    His arms were round her, and his breath beat warm
    Against her cheek.

       *   *   *   *

                       Suddenly, nigh the house,
    A deep-mouthed mastiff bayed and a foot crunched
    The gravel. "Hark! they are watching for thee," she cried.
    He laughed: "There's half of Europe on the watch
    Outside for my poor head, 'Tis cosier here
    With thee; but now"--his face grew grave, he drew
    A silken ladder from his doublet--"quick,
    Before yon good gamekeeper rounds the house
    We must be down." And ere the words were out
    Bess reached the path, and Drake was at her side.
    Then into the star-stabbed shadow of the woods
    They sped, his arm around her. Suddenly
    She drew back with a cry, as four grim faces,
    With hand to forelock, glimmered in their way.
    Laughing she saw their storm-beat friendly smile
    Welcome their doughty captain in this new
    Adventure. Far away, once more they heard
    The mastiff bay; then nearer, as if his nose
    Were down upon the trail; and then a cry
    As of a hot pursuit. They reached the brook,
    Hurrying to the deep. Drake lifted Bess
    In his arms, and down the watery bed they splashed
    To baffle the clamouring hunt. Then out of the woods
    They came, on the seaward side, and Bess, with a shiver,
    Saw starlight flashing from bare cutlasses,
    As the mastiff bayed still nearer. Swiftlier now
    They passed along the bare blunt cliffs and saw
    The furrow ploughed by that strange cannon-shot
    Which saved this hour for Bess; down to the beach
    And starry foam that churned the silver gravel
    Around an old black lurching boat, a strange
    Grim Charon's wherry for two lovers' flight,
    Guarded by old Tom Moone. Drake took her hand,
    And with one arm around her waist, her breath
    Warm on his cheek for a moment, in she stepped
    Daintily o'er the gunwale, and took her seat,
    His throned princess, beside him at the helm,
    Backed by the glittering waves, his throned princess,
    With jewelled throat and glorious hair that seemed
    Flashing back scents and colours to a sea
    Which lived but to reflect her loveliness.

    Then, all together, with their brandished oars
    The seamen thrust as a heavy mounded wave
    Lifted the boat; and up the flowering breast
    Of the next they soared, then settled at the thwarts,
    And the fierce water boiled before their blades
    While with Drake's iron hand upon the helm
    They plunged and ploughed across the starlit seas
    To where a small black lugger at anchor swung,
    Dipping her rakish brow i' the liquid moon.
    Small was she, but not fangless; for Bess saw,
    With half a tremor, the dumb protective grin
    Of four grim guns above the tossing boat.

    But ere his seamen or his sweetheart knew
    What power, as of a wind, bore them along,
    Anchor was up, the sails were broken out,
    And as they scudded down the dim grey coast
    Of a new enchanted world (for now had Love
    Made all things new and strange) the skilled musicians
    Upraised, at Drake's command, a song to cheer
    Their midnight path across that faery sea.


SONG


    I

    Sweet, what is love? 'Tis not the crown of kings,
    Nay, nor the fire of white seraphic wings!
    Is it a child's heart leaping while he sings?
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    II

    Love like a child around our world doth run,
    Happy, happy, happy for all that God hath done,
    Glad of all the little leaves dancing in the sun,
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    III

    Sweet, what is love? 'Tis not the burning bliss
    Angels know in heaven! God blows the world a kiss
    Wakes on earth a wild-rose! Ah, who knows not this?
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    IV

    Love, love is kind! Can it be far away,
    Lost in a light that blinds our little day?
    Seems it a great thing? Sweetheart, answer nay;
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    V

    Sweet, what is love? The dust beneath our feet,
    Whence breaks the rose and all the flowers that greet
    April and May with lips and heart so sweet;
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    VI

    Love is the dust whence Eden grew so fair,
    Dust of the dust that set my lover there,
    Ay, and wrought the gloriole of Eve's gold hair,
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    VII

    Also the springing spray, the little topmost flower
    Swung by the bird that sings a little hour,
    Earth's climbing spray into the heaven's blue bower,
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.

    And stranger, ever stranger, grew the night
    Around those twain, for whom the fleecy moon
    Was but a mightier Cleopatra's pearl
    Dissolving in the rich dark wine of night,
    While 'mid the tenderer talk of eyes and hands
    And whispered nothings, his great ocean realm
    Rolled round their gloomy barge, robing its hulk
    With splendours Rome and Egypt never knew.
    Old ocean was his Nile, his mighty queen
    An English maiden purer than the dawn,
    His cause the cause of Freedom, his reward
    The glory of England. Strangely simple, then,
    Simple as life and death, anguish and love,
    To Bess appeared those mighty dawning dreams,
    Whereby he shaped the pageant of the world
    To a new purpose, strangely simple all
    Those great new waking tides i' the world's great soul
    That set towards the fall of tyranny
    Behind a thunderous roar of ocean triumph
    O'er burning ships and shattered fleets, while England
    Grasped with sure hands the sceptre of the sea,
    That untamed realm of Liberty which none
    Had looked upon as aught but wilderness
    Ere this, or even dreamed of as the seat
    Of power and judgment and high sovereignty
    Whereby all nations at the last should make
    One brotherhood, and war should be no more.
    And ever, as the vision broadened out,
    The sense of some tremendous change at hand,
    The approach of vast Armadas and the dawn
    Of battle, reddening the diviner dawn
    With clouds, confused it, till once more the song
    Rang out triumphant o'er the glittering sea.


SONG


    I

    _Ye that follow the vision
      Of the world's weal afar,
    Have ye met with derision
      And the red laugh of war;
    Yet the thunder shall not hurt you,
      Nor the battle-storms dismay;
    Tho' the sun in heaven desert you,
      "Love will find out the way."_


    II

    _When the pulse of hope falters,
      When the fire flickers low
    On your faith's crumbling altars,
      And the faithless gods go;
    When the fond hope ye cherished
      Cometh, kissing, to betray;
    When the last star hath perished,
      "Love will find out the way."_


    III

    _When the last dream bereaveth you,
      And the heart turns to stone,
    When the last comrade leaveth you
      In the desert, alone;
    With the whole world before you
      Clad in battle-array,
    And the starless night o'er you,
      "Love will find out the way."_


    IV

    _Your dreamers may dream it
      The shadow of a dream,
    Your sages may deem it
      A bubble on the stream;
    Yet our kingdom draweth nigher
      With each dawn and every day,
    Through the earthquake and the fire
      "Love will find out the way."_


    V

    _Love will find it, tho' the nations
      Rise up blind, as of old,
    And the new generations
      Wage their warfares of gold;
    Tho' they trample child and mother
      As red clay into the clay,
    Where brother wars with brother,
      "Love will find out the way."_

    Dawn, ever bearing some divine increase
    Of beauty, love, and wisdom round the world,
    Dawn, like a wild-rose in the fields of heaven
    Washed grey with dew, awoke, and found the barque
    At anchor in a little land-locked bay.
    A crisp breeze blew, and all the living sea
    Beneath the flower-soft colours of the sky,
    Now like a myriad-petalled rose and now
    Innumerably scalloped into shells
    Of rosy fire, with dwindling wrinkles edged
    Fainter and fainter to the unruffled glow
    And soft white pallor of the distant deep,
    Shone with a mystic beauty for those twain
    Who watched the gathering glory; and, in an hour,
    Drake and sweet Bess, attended by a guard
    Of four swart seamen, with bare cutlasses,
    And by the faithful eyes of old Tom Moone,
    Went up the rough rock-steps and twisted street
    O' the small white sparkling seaport, tow'rds the church
    Where, hand in hand, before God's altar they,
    With steadfast eyes, did plight eternal troth,
    And so were wedded. Never a chime of bells
    Had they: but as they passed from out the porch
    Between the sleeping graves, a skylark soared
    Above the world in an ecstasy of song,
    And quivering heavenwards, lost himself in light.


BOOK IX

    Now like a white-cliffed fortress England shone
    Amid the mirk of chaos; for the huge
    Empire of Spain was but the dusky van
    Of that dread night beyond all nights and days,
    Night of the last corruption of a world
    Fast-bound in misery and iron, with chains
    Of priest and king and feudal servitude,
    Night of the fettered flesh and ravaged soul,
    Night of anarchic chaos, darkening the deep,
    Swallowing up cities, kingdoms, empires, gods,
    With vaster gloom approaching, till the sun
    Of love was blackened, the moon of faith was blood.
    All round our England, our small struggling star,
    Fortress of freedom, rock o' the world's desire,
    Bearing at last the hope of all mankind,
    The thickening darkness surged, and close at hand
    Those first fierce cloudy fringes of the storm,
    The Armada sails, gathered their might; and Spain
    Crouched close behind them with her screaming fires
    And steaming shambles, Spain, the hell-hag, crouched,
    Still grasping with red hand the cross of Christ
    By its great hilt, pointing it like a dagger,
    Spear-head of the ultimate darkness, at the throat
    Of England. Under Philip's feet at last
    Writhed all the Protestant Netherlands, dim coasts
    Right over against us, whence his panoplies
    Might suddenly whelm our isle. But all night long,
    On many a mountain, many a guardian height,
    From Beachy Head to Skiddaw, little groups
    Of seamen, torch and battle-lanthorn nigh,
    Watched by the brooding unlit beacons, piled
    Of sun-dried gorse, funereal peat, rough logs,
    Reeking with oil, 'mid sharp scents of the sea,
    Waste trampled grass and heather and close-cropped thyme,
    High o'er the thundering coast, among whose rocks
    Far, far below, the pacing coastguards gazed
    Steadfastly seaward through the loaded dusk.
    And through that deepening gloom when, as it seemed,
    All England held her breath in one grim doubt,
    Swift rumours flashed from North to South as runs
    The lightning round a silent thunder-cloud;
    And there were muttering crowds in the London streets,
    And hurrying feet in the brooding Eastern ports.
    All night, dark inns, gathering the country-side,
    Reddened with clashing auguries of war.
    All night, in the ships of Plymouth Sound, the soul
    Of Francis Drake was England, and all night
    Her singing seamen by the silver quays
    Polished their guns and waited for the dawn.

    But hour by hour that night grew deeper. Spain
    Watched, cloud by cloud, her huge Armadas grow,
    Watched, tower by tower, and zone by zone, her fleets
    Grapple the sky with a hundred hands and drag
    Whole sea-horizons into her menacing ranks,
    Joining her powers to the fierce night, while Philip
    Still strove, with many a crafty word, to lull
    The fears of Gloriana, till his plots
    Were ripe, his armaments complete; and still
    Great Gloriana took her woman's way,
    Preferring ever tortuous intrigue
    To battle, since the stakes had grown so great;
    Now, more than ever, hoping against hope
    To find some subtler means of victory;
    Yet not without swift impulses to strike,
    Swiftly recalled. Blind, yet not blind, she smiled
    On Mary of Scotland waiting for her throne,
    A throne with many a strange dark tremor thrilled
    Now as the rumoured murderous mines below
    Converged towards it, mine and countermine,
    Till the live earth was honeycombed with death.
    Still with her agate smile, still she delayed,
    Holding her pirate admiral in the leash
    Till Walsingham, nay, even the hunchback Burleigh,
    That crafty king of statesmen, seeing at last
    The inevitable thunder-crash at hand.
    Grew heart-sick with delay and ached to shatter
    The tense tremendous hush that seemed to oppress
    All hearts, compress all brows, load the broad night
    With more than mortal menace.

                                        Only once
    The night was traversed with one lightning flash,
    One rapier stroke from England, at the heart
    Of Spain, as swiftly parried, yet no less
    A fiery challenge; for Philip's hate and scorn
    Growing with his Armada's growth, he lured
    With promises of just and friendly trade
    A fleet of English corn-ships to relieve
    His famine-stricken coast. There as they lay
    Within his ports he seized them, one and all,
    To fill the Armada's maw.

                                 Whereat the Queen,
    Passive so long, summoned great Walsingham,
    And, still averse from open war, despite
    The battle-hunger burning in his eyes,
    With one strange swift sharp agate smile she hissed,
    "Unchain _El Draque_!"

                             A lightning flash indeed
    Was this; for he whose little _Golden Hynde_
    With scarce a score of seamen late had scourged
    The Spanish Main; he whose piratic neck
    Scarcely the Queen's most wily statecraft saved
    From Spain's revenge: he, privateer to the eyes
    Of Spain, but England to all English hearts,
    Gathered together, in all good jollity,
    All help and furtherance himself could wish,
    Before that moon was out, a pirate fleet
    Whereof the like old ocean had not seen--
    Eighteen swift cruisers, two great battleships,
    With pinnaces and store-ships and a force
    Of nigh three thousand men, wherewith to singe
    The beard o' the King of Spain.
                                     By night they gathered
    In marvellous wind-whipt inns nigh Plymouth Sound,
    Not secretly as, ere the _Golden Hynde_
    Burst thro' the West, that small adventurous crew
    Gathered beside the Thames, tossing the phrase
    "Pieces of eight" from mouth to mouth, and singing
    Great songs of the rich Indies, and those tall
    Enchanted galleons, red with blood and gold,
    Superb with rubies, glorious as clouds,
    Clouds in the sun, with mighty press of sail
    Dragging the sunset out of the unknown world,
    And staining all the grey old seas of Time
    With rich romance; but these, though privateers,
    Or secret knights on Gloriana's quest,
    Recked not if round the glowing magic door
    Of every inn the townsfolk grouped to hear
    The storm-scarred seamen toasting Francis Drake,
    Nor heeded what blithe urchin faces pressed
    On each red-curtained magic casement, bright
    With wild reflection of the fires within,
    The fires, the glasses, and the singing lips
    Lifting defiance to the powers of Spain.


SONG

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower of flowers most glorious!
    Never a storm that blows
      Across our English sea,
    But its heart breaks out wi' the Rose
      On England's flag victorious,
    The triumphing flag that flows
      Thro' the heavens of Liberty.

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower of flowers most beautiful!
    Until the world shall end
      She blossometh year by year,
    Red with the blood that flows
      For England's sake, most dutiful,
    Wherefore now we bend
      Our hearts and knees to her.

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower, the flower of war it is,
    Where deep i' the midnight gloom
      Its waves are the waves of the sea,
    And the glare of battle grows,
      And red over hulk and spar it is,
    Till the grim black broadsides bloom
      With our Rose of Victory.

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower, the flower of love it is,
    Which lovers aye shall sing
      And nightingales proclaim;
    For O, the heaven that glows,
      That glows and burns above it is
    Freedom's perpetual Spring,
      Our England's faithful fame.

    Sing we the Rose,
      That Eastward still shall spread for us
    Upon the dawn's bright breast,
      Red leaves wi' the foam impearled;
    And onward ever flows
      Till eventide make red for us
    A Rose that sinks i' the West
      And surges round the world;
    Sing we the Rose!

    One night as, with his great vice-admiral,
    Frobisher, his rear-admiral, Francis Knollys,
    And Thomas Fenner, his flag-captain, Drake
    Took counsel at his tavern, there came a knock,
    The door opened, and cold as from the sea
    The gloom rushed in, and there against the night,
    Clad as it seemed with wind and cloud and rain,
    Glittered a courtier whom by face and form
    All knew for the age's brilliant paladin,
    Sidney, the king of courtesy, a star
    Of chivalry. The seamen stared at him,
    Each with a hand upon the red-lined chart
    Outspread before them. Then all stared at Drake,
    Who crouched like a great bloodhound o'er the table,
    And rose with a strange light burning in his eyes;
    For he remembered how, three years agone,
    That other courtier came, with words and smiles
    Copied from Sidney's self; and in his ears
    Rang once again the sound of the two-edged sword
    Upon the desolate Patagonian shore
    Beneath Magellan's gallows. With a voice
    So harsh himself scarce knew it, he desired
    This fair new courtier's errand. With grim eyes
    He scanned the silken knight from head to foot,
    While Sidney, smiling graciously, besought
    Some place in their adventure. Drake's clenched fist
    Crashed down on the old oak table like a rock,
    Splintering the wood and dashing his rough wrist
    With blood, as he thundered, "By the living God,
    No! We've no room for courtiers, now! We leave
    All that to Spain."
                          Whereat, seeing Sidney stood
    Amazed, Drake, drawing nearer, said, "You ask
    More than you dream: I know you for a knight
    Most perfect and most gentle, yea, a man
    Ready to die on any battle-field
    To save a wounded friend" (even so said Drake,
    Not knowing how indeed this knight would die),
    Then fiercely he outstretched his bleeding hand
    And pointed through the door to where the gloom
    Glimmered with bursting spray, and the thick night
    Was all one wandering thunder of hidden seas
    Rolling out of Eternity: "You'll find
    No purple fields of Arcady out there,
    No shepherds piping in those boisterous valleys,
    No sheep among those roaring mountain-tops,
    No lists of feudal chivalry. I've heard
    That voice cry death to courtiers. 'Tis God's voice.
    Take you the word of one who has occupied
    His business in great waters. There's no room,
    Meaning, or reason, office, or place, or name
    For courtiers on the sea. Does the sea flatter?
    You cannot bribe it, torture it, or tame it!
    Its laws are those of the Juggernaut universe,
    Remorseless--listen to that!"--a mighty wave
    Broke thundering down the coast; "your hands are white,
    Your rapier jewelled, can you grapple that?
    What part have you in all its flaming ways?
    What share in its fierce gloom? Has your heart broken
    As those waves break out there? Can you lie down
    And sleep, as a lion-cub by the old lion,
    When it shakes its mane out over you to hide you,
    And leap out with the dawn as I have done?
    These are big words; but, see, my hand is red:
    You cannot torture me, I have borne all that;
    And so I have some kinship with the sea,
    Some sort of wild alliance with its storms,
    Its exultations, ay, and its great wrath
    At last, and power upon them. 'Tis the worse
    For Spain, Be counselled well: come not between
    My sea and its rich vengeance."
                                     Silently,
    Bowing his head, Sidney withdrew. But Drake,
    So fiercely the old grief rankled in his heart,
    Summoned his swiftest horseman, bidding him ride,
    Ride like the wind through the night, straight to the Queen,
    Praying she would most instantly recall
    Her truant courtier. Nay, to make all sure,
    Drake sent a gang of seamen out to crouch
    Ambushed in woody hollows nigh the road,
    Under the sailing moon, there to waylay
    The Queen's reply, that she might never know
    It reached him, if it proved against his will.

    And swiftly came that truant's stern recall;
    But Drake, in hourly dread of some new change
    In Gloriana's mood, slept not by night
    Or day, till out of roaring Plymouth Sound
    The pirate fleet swept to the wind-swept main,
    And took the wind and shook out all its sails.
    Then with the unfettered sea he mixed his soul
    In great rejoicing union, while the ships
    Crashing and soaring o'er the heart-free waves
    Drave ever straight for Spain.
                                    Water and food
    They lacked; but the fierce fever of his mind
    To sail from Plymouth ere the Queen's will changed
    Had left no time for these. Right on he drave,
    Determining, though the Queen's old officers
    Beneath him stood appalled, to take in stores
    Of all he needed, water, powder, food,
    By plunder of Spain herself. In Vigo bay,
    Close to Bayona town, under the cliffs
    Of Spain's world-wide and thunder-fraught prestige
    He anchored, with the old sea-touch that wakes
    Our England still. There, in the tingling ears
    Of the world he cried, _En garde_! to the King of Spain.
    There, ordering out his pinnaces in force,
    While a great storm, as if he held indeed
    Heaven's batteries in reserve, growled o'er the sea,
    He landed. Ere one cumbrous limb of all
    The monstrous armaments of Spain could move
    His ships were stored; and ere the sword of Spain
    Stirred in its crusted sheath, Bayona town
    Beheld an empty sea; for like a dream
    The pirate fleet had vanished, none knew whither.
    But, in its visible stead, invisible fear
    Filled the vast rondure of the sea and sky
    As with the omnipresent soul of Drake.
    For when Spain saw the small black anchored fleet
    Ride in her bays, the sight set bounds to fear.
    She knew at least the ships were oak, the guns
    Of common range: nor did she dream e'en Drake
    Could sail two seas at once. Now all her coasts
    Heard him all night in every bursting wave,
    His topsails gleamed in every moonlit cloud;
    His battle-lanthorn glittered in the stars
    That hung the low horizon. He became
    A universal menace; yet there followed
    No sight or sound of him, unless the sea
    Were that grim soul incarnate. Did it not roar
    His great commands? The very spray that lashed
    The cheeks of Spanish seamen lashed their hearts
    To helpless hatred of him. The wind sang
    _El Draque_ across the rattling blocks and sheets
    When storms perplexed them; and when ships went down,
    As under the fury of his onsetting battle,
    The drowning sailors cursed him while they sank.

    Suddenly a rumour shook the Spanish Court,
    He has gone once more to the Indies. Santa Cruz,
    High Admiral of Spain, the most renowned
    Captain in Europe, clamoured for a fleet
    Of forty sail instantly to pursue.
    For unto him whose little _Golden Hynde_
    Was weapon enough, now leading such a squadron,
    The West Indies, the whole Pacific coast,
    And the whole Spanish Main, lay at his mercy.

    And onward over the great grey gleaming sea
    Swept like a thunder-cloud the pirate fleet
    With vengeance in its heart. Five years agone,
    Young Hawkins, in the Cape Verde Islands, met--
    At Santiago--with such treachery
    As Drake burned to requite, and from that hour
    Was Santiago doomed. His chance had come;
    Drake swooped upon it, plundered it, and was gone,
    Leaving the treacherous isle a desolate heap
    Of smoking ashes in the leaden sea,
    While onward all those pirate bowsprits plunged
    Into the golden West, across the broad
    Atlantic once again; "For I will show,"
    Said Drake, "that Englishmen henceforth will sail
    Old ocean where they will." Onward they surged,
    And the great glittering crested majestic waves
    Jubilantly rushed up to meet the keels,
    And there was nought around them but the grey
    Ruin and roar of the huge Atlantic seas,
    Grey mounded seas, pursuing and pursued,
    That fly, hounded and hounding on for ever,
    From empty marge to marge of the grey sky.
    Over the wandering wilderness of foam,
    Onward, through storm and death, Drake swept; for now
    Once more a fell plague gripped the tossing ships,
    And not by twos and threes as heretofore
    His crews were minished; but in three black days
    Three hundred seamen in their shotted shrouds
    Were cast into the deep. Onward he swept,
    Implacably, having in mind to strike
    Spain in the throat at St. Domingo, port
    Of Hispaniola, a city of far renown,
    A jewel on the shores of old romance,
    Palm-shadowed, gated with immortal gold,
    Queen city of Spain's dominions over sea,
    And guarded by great guns. Out of the dawn
    The pirate ships came leaping, grim and black,
    And ere the Spaniards were awake, the flag
    Of England floated from their topmost tower.
    But since he had not troops enough to hold
    So great a city, Drake entrenched his men
    Within the Plaza and held the batteries.
    Thence he demanded ransom, and sent out
    A boy with flag of truce. The boy's return
    Drake waited long. Under a sheltering palm
    He stood, watching the enemies' camp, and lo,
    Along the hot white purple-shadowed road
    Tow'rds him, a crawling shape writhed through the dust
    Up to his feet, a shape besmeared with blood,
    A shape that held the stumps up of its wrists
    And moaned, an eyeless thing, a naked rag
    Of flesh obscenely mangled, a small face
    Hideously puckered, shrivelled like a monkey's
    With lips drawn backward from its teeth.
                                             "Speak, speak,
    In God's name, speak, what art thou?" whispered Drake,
    And a sharp cry came, answering his dread,
    A cry as of a sea-bird in the wind
    Desolately astray from all earth's shores,
    "Captain, I am thy boy, only thy boy!
    See, see, my captain, see what they have done!
    Captain, I only bore the flag; I only----"

    "O, lad, lad, lad," moaned Drake, and, stooping, strove
    To pillow the mangled head upon his arm.
    "What have they done to thee, what have they done?"
    And at the touch the boy screamed, once, and died.

    Then like a savage sea with arms uplift
    To heaven the wrath of Drake blazed thundering,
    "Eternal God, be this the doom of Spain!
    Henceforward have no pity. Send the strength
    Of Thy great seas into my soul that I
    May devastate this empire, this red hell
    They make of Thy good earth."
                                       His men drew round,
    Staring in horror at the silent shape
    That daubed his feet. Like a cold wind
    His words went through their flesh:
                                          "This is the lad
    That bore our flag of truce. This hath Spain done.
    Look well upon it, draw the smoke of the blood
    Up into your nostrils, my companions,
    And down into your souls. This makes an end
    For Spain! Bring forth the Spanish prisoners
    And let me look on them."

                                 Forth they were brought,
    A swarthy gorgeous band of soldiers, priests,
    And sailors, hedged between two sturdy files
    Of British tars with naked cutlasses.
    Close up to Drake they halted, under the palm,
    Gay smiling prisoners, for they thought their friends
    Had ransomed them. Then they looked up and met
    A glance that swept athwart them like a sword,
    Making the blood strain back from their blanched faces
    Into their quivering hearts, with unknown dread,
    As that accuser pointed to the shape
    Before his feet.
                    "Dogs, will ye lap his blood
    Before ye die? Make haste; for it grows cold!
    Ye will not, will not even dabble your hands
    In that red puddle of flesh, what? Are ye Spaniards?
    Come, come, I'll look at you, perchance there's one
    That's but a demi-devil and holds you back."
    And with the word Drake stepped among their ranks
    And read each face among the swarthy crew--
    The gorgeous soldiers, ringleted sailors, priests
    With rosary and cross, a slender page
    In scarlet with a cloud of golden hair,
    And two rope-girdled friars.
                                 The slim page
    Drake drew before the throng. "You are young," he said,
    "Go; take this message to the camp of Spain:
    Tell them I have a hunger in my soul
    To look upon the murderers of this boy,
    To see what eyes they have, what manner of mouths,
    To touch them and to take their hands in mine,
    And draw them close to me and smile upon them
    Until they know my soul as I know theirs,
    And they grovel in the dust and grope for mercy.
    Say that, until I get them, every day
    I'll hang two Spaniards though I dispeople
    The Spanish Main. Tell them that, every day,
    I'll burn a portion of their city down,
    Then find another city and burn that,
    And then burn others till I burn away
    Their empire from the world, ay, till I reach
    The Imperial throne of Philip with my fires,
    And send it shrieking down to burn in hell
    For ever. Go!"
                       Then Drake turned once again,
    To face the Spanish prisoners. With a voice
    Cold as the passionless utterance of Fate
    His grim command went forth. "Now, provost-marshal,
    Begin with yon two friars, in whose faces
    Chined like singed swine, and eyed with the spent coals
    Of filthy living, sweats the glory of Spain.
    Strip off their leprous rags
    And twist their ropes around their throats and hang them
    High over the Spanish camp for all to see.
    At dawn I'll choose two more."


BOOK X

                                        Across the Atlantic
    Great rumours rushed as of a mighty wind,
    The wind of the spirit of Drake. But who shall tell
    In this cold age the power that he became
    Who drew the universe within his soul
    And moved with cosmic forces? Though the deep
    Divided it from Drake, the gorgeous court
    Of Philip shuddered away from the streaming coasts
    As a wind-cuffed field of golden wheat. The King,
    Bidding his guests to a feast in his own ship
    On that wind-darkened sea, was made a mock,
    As one by one his ladies proffered excuse
    For fear of That beyond. Round Europe now
    Ballad and story told how in the cabin
    Of Francis Drake there hung a magic glass
    Wherein he saw the fleets of every foe
    And all that passed aboard them. Rome herself,
    Perplexed that this proud heretic should prevail,
    Fostered a darker dream, that Drake had bought,
    Like old Norse wizards, power to loose or bind
    The winds at will.

                         And now a wilder tale
    Flashed o'er the deep--of a distant blood-red dawn
    O'er San Domingo, where the embattled troops
    Of Spain and Drake were met--but not in war--
    Met in the dawn, by his compelling will,
    To offer up a sacrifice. Yea, there
    Between the hosts, the hands of Spain herself
    Slaughtered the Spanish murderers of the boy
    Who had borne Drake's flag of truce; offered them up
    As a blood-offering and an expiation
    Lest Drake, with that dread alchemy of his soul,
    Should e'en transmute the dust beneath their feet
    To one same substance with the place of pain
    And whelm them suddenly in the eternal fires.
    Rumour on rumour rushed across the sea,
    Large mockeries, and one most bitter of all,
    Wormwood to Philip, of how Drake had stood
    I' the governor's house at San Domingo, and seen
    A mighty scutcheon of the King of Spain
    Whereon was painted the terrestrial globe,
    And on the globe a mighty steed in act
    To spring into the heavens, and from its mouth
    Streaming like smoke a scroll, and on the scroll
    Three words of flame and fury--_Non sufficit
    Orbis_--of how Drake and his seamen stood
    Gazing upon it, and could not forbear
    From summoning the Spaniards to expound
    Its meaning, whereupon a hurricane roar
    Of mirth burst from those bearded British lips,
    And that immortal laughter shook the world.

    So, while the imperial warrior eyes of Spain
    Watched, every hour, her vast Armada grow
    Readier to launch and shatter with one stroke
    Our island's frail defence, fear gripped her still,
    For there came sounds across the heaving sea
    Of secret springs unsealed, forces unchained,
    A mustering of deep elemental powers,
    A sound as of the burgeoning of boughs
    In universal April and dead hearts
    Uprising from their tombs; a mighty cry
    Of resurrection, surging through the souls
    Of all mankind. For now the last wild tale
    Swept like another dawn across the deep;
    And, in that dawn, men saw the slaves of Spain,
    The mutilated negroes of the mines,
    With gaunt backs wealed and branded, scarred and seared
    By whip and iron, in Spain's brute lust for gold,
    Saw them, at Drake's great liberating word,
    Burst from their chains, erect, uplifting hands
    Of rapture to the glad new light that then,
    Then first, began to struggle thro' the clouds
    And crown all manhood with a sacred crown
    August--a light which, though from age to age
    Clouds may obscure it, grows and still shall grow,
    Until that Kingdom come, that grand Communion,
    That Commonweal, that Empire, which still draws
    Nigher with every hour, that Federation,
    That turning of the wasteful strength of war
    To accomplish large and fruitful tasks of peace,
    That gathering up of one another's loads
    Whereby the weak are strengthened and the strong
    Made stronger in the increasing good of all.
    Then, suddenly, it seemed, as he had gone,
    A ship came stealing into Plymouth Sound
    And Drake was home again, but not to rest;
    For scarce had he cast anchor ere the road
    To London rang beneath the flying hoofs
    That bore his brief despatch to Burleigh, saying--
    "We have missed the Plate Fleet by but twelve hours' sail,
    The reason being best known to God. No less
    We have given a cooling to the King of Spain.
    There is a great gap opened which, methinks,
    Is little to his liking. We have sacked
    The towns of his chief Indies, burnt their ships,
    Captured great store of gold and precious stones,
    Three hundred pieces of artillery,
    The more part brass. Our loss is heavy indeed,
    Under the hand of God, eight hundred men,
    Three parts of them by sickness. Captain Moone,
    My trusty old companion, he that struck
    The first blow in the South Seas at a Spaniard,
    Died of a grievous wound at Cartagena.
    My fleet and I are ready to strike again
    At once, where'er the Queen and England please.
    I pray for her commands, and those with speed,
    That I may strike again." Outside the scroll
    These words were writ once more--"My Queen's commands
    I much desire, your servant, Francis Drake."

    This terse despatch the hunchback Burleigh read
    Thrice over, with the broad cliff of his brow
    Bending among his books. Thrice he assayed
    To steel himself with caution as of old;
    And thrice, as a glorious lightning running along
    And flashing between those simple words, he saw
    The great new power that lay at England's hand,
    An ocean-sovereignty, a power unknown
    Before, but dawning now; a power that swept
    All earth's old plots and counterplots away
    Like straws; the germ of an unmeasured force
    New-born, that laid the source of Spanish might
    At England's mercy! Could that force but grow
    Ere Spain should nip it, ere the mighty host
    That waited in the Netherlands even now,
    That host of thirty thousand men encamped
    Round Antwerp, under Parma, should embark
    Convoyed by that Invincible Armada
    To leap at England's throat! Thrice he assayed
    To think of England's helplessness, her ships
    Little and few. Thrice he assayed to quench
    With caution the high furnace of his soul
    Which Drake had kindled. As he read the last
    Rough simple plea, _I wait my Queen's commands_,
    His deep eyes flashed with glorious tears.
                                              He leapt
    To his feet and cried aloud, "Before my God,
    I am proud, I am very proud for England's sake!
    This Drake is a terrible man to the King of Spain."

    And still, still, Gloriana, brooding darkly
    On Mary of Scotland's doom, who now at last
    Was plucked from out her bosom like a snake
    Hissing of war with France, a queenly snake,
    A Lilith in whose lovely gleaming folds
    And sexual bonds the judgment of mankind
    Writhes even yet half-strangled, meting out
    Wild execrations on the maiden Queen
    Who quenched those jewelled eyes and mixt with dust
    That white and crimson, who with cold sharp steel
    In substance and in spirit, severed the neck
    And straightened out those glittering supple coils
    For ever; though for evermore will men
    Lie subject to the unforgotten gleam
    Of diamond eyes and cruel crimson mouth,
    And curse the sword-bright intellect that struck
    Like lightning far through Europe and the world
    For England, when amid the embattled fury
    Of world-wide empires, England stood alone.
    Still she held back from war, still disavowed
    The deeds of Drake to Spain; and yet once more
    Philip, resolved at last never to swerve
    By one digressive stroke, one ell or inch
    From his own patient, sure, laborious path,
    Accepted her suave plea, and with all speed
    Pressed on his huge emprise until it seemed
    His coasts groaned with grim bulks of cannonry,
    Thick loaded hulks of thunder and towers of doom;
    And, all round Antwerp, Parma still prepared
    To hurl such armies o'er the rolling sea
    As in all history hardly the earth herself
    Felt shake with terror her own green hills and plains.
    _I wait my Queen's commands!_ Despite the plea
    Urged every hour upon her with the fire
    That burned for action in the soul of Drake,
    Still she delayed, till on one darkling eve
    She gave him audience in that glimmering room
    Where first he saw her. Strangely sounded there
    The seaman's rough strong passion as he poured
    His heart before her, pleading--"Every hour
    Is one more victory lost," and only heard
    The bitter answer--"Nay, but every hour
    Is a breath snatched from the unconquerable
    Doom, that awaits us if we are forced to war.
    Yea, and who knows?--though Spain may forge a sword,
    Its point is not inevitably bared
    Against the breast of England!" As she spake,
    The winds without clamoured with clash of bells,
    There was a gleam of torches and a roar--
    _Mary, the traitress of the North, is dead,
    God save the Queen!_
                         Her head bent down: she wept.
    "Pity me, friend, though I be queen, O yet
    My heart is woman, and I am sore pressed
    On every side,--Scotland and France and Spain
    Beset me, and I know not where to turn."
    Even as she spake, there came a hurried step
    Into that dim rich chamber. Walsingham
    Stood there, before her, without ceremony
    Thrusting a letter forth: "At last," he cried,
    "Your Majesty may read the full intent
    Of priestly Spain. Here, plainly written out
    Upon this paper, worth your kingdom's crown,
    This letter, stolen by a trusty spy,
    Out of the inmost chamber of the Pope
    Sixtus himself, here is your murder planned:
    Blame not your Ministers who with such haste
    Plucked out this viper, Mary, from your breast!
    Read here--how, with his thirty thousand men,
    The pick of Europe, Parma joins the Scots,
    While Ireland, grasped in their Armada's clutch,
    And the Isle of Wight, against our west and south
    Become their base."
                        "Rome, Rome, and Rome again,
    And always Rome," she muttered; "even here
    In England hath she thousands yet. She hath struck
    Her curse out with pontific finger at me,
    Cursed me down and away to the bottomless pit.
    Her shadow like the shadow of clouds or sails,
    The shadow of that huge event at hand,
    Darkens the seas already, and the wind
    Is on my cheek that shakes my kingdom down.
    She hath thousands here in England, born and bred
    Englishmen. They will stand by Rome!"

                                           "'Fore God,"
    Cried Walsingham, "my Queen, you do them wrong!
    There is another Rome--not this of Spain
    Which lurks to pluck the world back into darkness
    And stab it there for gold. There is a City
    Whose eyes are tow'rd the morning; on whose heights
    Blazes the Cross of Christ above the world;
    A Rome that shall wage warfare yet for God
    In the dark days to come, a Rome whose thought
    Shall march with our humanity and be proud
    To cast old creeds like seed into the ground,
    Watch the strange shoots and foster the new flower
    Of faiths we know not yet. Is this a dream?
    I speak as one by knighthood bound to speak;
    For even this day--and my heart burns with it--
    I heard the Catholic gentlemen of England
    Speaking in grave assembly. At one breath
    Of peril to our island, why, their swords
    Leapt from their scabbards, and their cry went up
    To split the heavens--_God save our English Queen!_"
    Even as he spake there passed the rushing gleam
    Of torches once again, and as they stood
    Silently listening, all the winds ran wild
    With clamouring bells, and a great cry went up--
    _God save Elizabeth, our English Queen!_

    "I'll vouch for some two hundred Catholic throats
    Among that thousand," whispered Walsingham
    Eagerly, with his eyes on the Queen's face.
    Then, seeing it brighten, fervently he cried,
    Pressing the swift advantage home, "O, Madam,
    The heart of England now is all on fire!
    We are one people, as we have not been
    In all our history, all prepared to die
    Around your throne. Madam, you are beloved
    As never yet was English king or queen!"
    She looked at him, the tears in her keen eyes
    Glittered--"And I am very proud," she said,
    "But if our enemies command the world,
    And we have one small island and no more...."
    She ceased; and Drake, in a strange voice, hoarse and low,
    Trembling with passion deeper than all speech,
    Cried out--"No more than the great ocean-sea
    Which makes the enemies' coast our frontier now;
    No more than that great Empire of the deep
    Which rolls from Pole to Pole, washing the world
    With thunder, that great Empire whose command
    This day is yours to take. Hear me, my Queen,
    This is a dream, a new dream, but a true;
    For mightier days are dawning on the world
    Than heart of man hath known. If England hold
    The sea, she holds the hundred thousand gates
    That open to futurity. She holds
    The highway of all ages. Argosies
    Of unknown glory set their sails this day
    For England out of ports beyond the stars.
    Ay, on the sacred seas we ne'er shall know
    They hoist their sails this day by peaceful quays,
    Great gleaming wharves in the perfect City of God,
    If she but claim her heritage."
                                    He ceased;
    And the deep dream of that new realm the sea,
    Through all the soul of Gloriana surged,
    A moment, then with splendid eyes that filled
    With fire of sunsets far away, she cried
    (Faith making her a child, yet queenlier still)
    "Yea, claim it thou for me!"
                                 A moment there
    Trembling she stood. Then, once again, there passed
    A rush of torches through the gloom without,
    And a great cry "_God save Elizabeth,
    God save our English Queen!_"
                                      "Yea go, then, go,"
    She said, "God speed you now, Sir Francis Drake,
    Not as a privateer, but with full powers,
    My Admiral-at-the-Seas!"
                                Without a word
    Drake bent above her hand and, ere she knew it,
    His eyes from the dark doorway flashed farewell
    And he was gone. But ere he leapt to saddle
    Walsingham stood at his stirrup, muttering "Ride,
    Ride now like hell to Plymouth; for the Queen
    Is hard beset, and ere ye are out at sea
    Her mood will change. The friends of Spain will move
    Earth and the heavens for your recall. They'll tempt her
    With their false baits of peace, though I shall stand
    Here at your back through thick and thin; farewell!"
    Fire flashed beneath the hoofs and Drake was gone.

    Scarce had he vanished in the night than doubt
    Once more assailed the Queen. The death of Mary
    Had brought e'en France against her. Walsingham,
    And Burleigh himself, prime mover of that death,
    Being held in much disfavour for it, stood
    As helpless. Long ere Drake or human power,
    They thought, could put to sea, a courier sped
    To Plymouth bidding Drake forbear to strike
    At Spain, but keep to the high seas, and lo,
    The roadstead glittered empty. Drake was gone!

    Gone! Though the friends of Spain had poured their gold
    To thin his ranks, and every hour his crews
    Deserted, he had laughed--"Let Spain buy scum!
    Next to an honest seaman I love best
    An honest landsman. What more goodly task
    Than teaching brave men seamanship?" He had filled
    His ships with soldiers! Out in the teeth of the gale
    That raged against him he had driven. In vain,
    Amid the boisterous laughter of the quays,
    A pinnace dashed in hot pursuit and met
    A roaring breaker and came hurtling back
    With oars and spars all trailing in the foam,
    A tangled mass of wreckage and despair.
    Sky swept to stormy sky: no sail could live
    In that great yeast of waves; but Drake was gone!

    Then, once again, across the rolling sea
    Great rumours rushed of how he had sacked the port
    Of Cadiz and had swept along the coast
    To Lisbon, where the whole Armada lay.
    Had snapped up prizes under its very nose,
    And taunted Santa Cruz, High Admiral
    Of Spain, striving to draw him out for fight,
    And offering, if his course should lie that way,
    To convoy him to Britain, taunted him
    So bitterly that for once, in the world's eyes,
    A jest had power to kill; for Santa Cruz
    Died with the spleen of it, since he could not move
    Before the appointed season. Then there came
    Flying back home, the Queen's old Admiral
    Borough, deserting Drake and all aghast
    At Drake's temerity: "For," he said, "this man,
    Thrust o'er my head, against all precedent,
    Bade me follow him into harbour mouths
    A-flame with cannon like the jaws of death,
    Whereat I much demurred; and straightway Drake
    Clapped me in irons, me--an officer
    And Admiral of the Queen; and, though my voice
    Was all against it, plunged into the pit
    Without me, left me with some word that burns
    And rankles in me still, making me fear
    The man was mad, some word of lonely seas,
    A desert island and a mutineer
    And dead Magellan's gallows. Sirs, my life
    Was hardly safe with him. Why, he resolved
    To storm the Castle of St. Vincent, sirs,
    A castle on a cliff, grinning with guns,
    Well known impregnable! The Spaniards fear
    Drake; but to see him land below it and bid
    Surrender, sirs, the strongest fort of Spain
    Without a blow, they laughed! And straightway he,
    With all the fury of Satan, turned that cliff
    To hell itself. He sent down to the ships
    For faggots, broken oars, beams, bowsprits, masts,
    And piled them up against the outer gates,
    Higher and higher, and fired them. There he stood
    Amid the smoke and flame and cannon-shot,
    This Admiral, like a common seamen, black
    With soot, besmeared with blood, his naked arms
    Full of great faggots, labouring like a giant
    And roaring like Apollyon. Sirs, he is mad!
    But did he take it, say you? Yea, he took it,
    The mightiest stronghold on the coast of Spain,
    Took it and tumbled all its big brass guns
    Clattering over the cliffs into the sea.
    But, sirs, ye need not raise a cheer so loud
    It is not warfare. 'Twas a madman's trick,
    A devil's!"
                 Then the rumour of a storm
    That scattered the fleet of Drake to the four winds
    Disturbed the heart of England, as his ships
    Came straggling into harbour, one by one,
    Saying they could not find him. Then, at last,
    When the storm burst in its earth-shaking might
    Along our coasts, one night of rolling gloom
    His cannon woke old Plymouth. In he came
    Across the thunder and lightning of the sea
    With his grim ship of war and, close behind,
    A shadow like a mountain or a cloud
    Torn from the heaven-high panoplies of Spain,
    A captured galleon loomed, and round her prow
    A blazoned scroll, whence (as she neared the quays
    Which many a lanthorn swung from brawny fist
    Yellowed) the sudden crimson of her name
    _San Filippe_ flashed o'er the white sea of faces,
    And a rending shout went skyward that outroared
    The blanching breakers--"'Tis the heart of Spain!
    The great _San Filippe_!" Overhead she towered,
    The mightiest ship afloat; and in her hold
    The riches of a continent, a prize
    Greater than earth had ever known; for there
    Not only ruby and pearl like ocean-beaches
    Heaped on some wizard coast in that dim hull
    Blazed to the lanthorn-light; not only gold
    Gleamed, though of gold a million would not buy
    Her store; but in her cabin lay the charts
    And secrets of the wild unwhispered wealth
    Of India, secrets that splashed London wharves
    With coloured dreams and made her misty streets
    Flame like an Eastern City when the sun
    Shatters itself on jewelled domes and spills
    Its crimson wreckage thro' the silvery palms.
    And of those dreams the far East India quest
    Began: the first foundation-stone was laid
    Of our great Indian Empire, and a star
    Began to tremble on the brows of England
    That time can never darken.
                                  But now the seas
    Darkened indeed with menace; now at last
    The cold wind of the black approaching wings
    Of Azrael crept across the deep: the storm
    Throbbed with their thunderous pulse, and ere that moon
    Waned, a swift gunboat foamed into the Sound
    With word that all the Invincible Armada
    Was hoisting sail for England.
                                     Even now,
    Elizabeth, torn a thousand ways, withheld
    The word for which Drake pleaded as for life,
    That he might meet them ere they left their coasts,
    Meet them or ever they reached the Channel, meet them
    Now, or--"Too late! Too late!" At last his voice
    Beat down e'en those that blindly dinned her ears
    With chatter of meeting Spain on British soil;
    And swiftly she commanded (seeing once more
    The light that burned amid the approaching gloom
    In Drake's deep eyes) Lord Howard of Effingham,
    High Admiral of England, straight to join him
    At Plymouth Sound. "How many ships are wanted?"
    She asked him, thinking "we are few, indeed!"
    "Give me but sixteen merchantmen," he said,
    "And but four battleships, by the mercy of God,
    I'll answer for the Armada!" Out to sea
    They swept, in the teeth of a gale; but vainly Drake
    Strove to impart the thought wherewith his mind
    Travailed--to win command of the ocean-sea
    By bursting on the fleets of Spain at once
    Even as they left their ports, not as of old
    To hover in a vain dream of defence
    Round fifty threatened points of British coast,
    But Howard, clinging to his old-world order,
    Flung out his ships in a loose, long, straggling line
    Across the Channel, waiting, wary, alert,
    But powerless thus as a string of scattered sea-gulls
    Beating against the storm. Then, flying to meet them,
    A merchantman brought terror down the wind,
    With news that she had seen that monstrous host
    Stretching from sky to sky, great hulks of doom,
    Dragging death's midnight with them o'er the sea
    Tow'rds England. Up to Howard's flag-ship Drake
    In his immortal battle-ship--_Revenge_,
    Rushed thro' the foam, and thro' the swirling seas
    His pinnace dashed alongside. On to the decks
    O' the tossing flag-ship, like a very Viking
    Shaking the surf and rainbows of the spray
    From sun-smit lion-like mane and beard he stood
    Before Lord Howard in the escutcheoned poop
    And poured his heart out like the rending sea
    In passionate wave on wave:
                                  "If yonder fleet
    Once reach the Channel, hardly the mercy of God
    Saves England! I would pray with my last breath,
    Let us beat up to windward of them now,
    And handle them before they reach the Channel."
    "Nay; but we cannot bare the coast," cried Howard,
    "Nor have we stores of powder or food enough!"
    "My lord," said Drake, with his great arm outstretched,
    "There is food enough in yonder enemy's ships,
    And powder enough and cannon-shot enough!
    We must re-victual there. Look! look!" he cried,
    And pointed to the heavens. As for a soul
    That by sheer force of will compels the world
    To work his bidding, so it seemed the wind
    That blew against them slowly veered. The sails
    Quivered, the skies revolved. A northerly breeze
    Awoke and now, behind the British ships,
    Blew steadily tow'rds the unseen host of Spain.
    "It is the breath of God," cried Drake; "they lie
    Wind-bound, and we may work our will with them.
    Signal the word, Lord Howard, and drive down!"
    And as a man convinced by heaven itself
    Lord Howard ordered, straightway, the whole fleet
    To advance.
                  And now, indeed, as Drake foresaw,
    The Armada lay, beyond the dim horizon,
    Wind-bound and helpless in Corunna bay,
    At England's mercy, could her fleet but draw
    Nigh enough, with its fire-ships and great guns
    To windward. Nearer, nearer, league by league
    The ships of England came: till Ushant lay
    Some seventy leagues behind. Then, yet once more
    The wind veered, straight against them. To remain
    Beating against it idly was to starve:
    And, as a man whose power upon the world
    Fails for one moment of exhausted will,
    Drake, gathering up his forces as he went
    For one more supreme effort, turned his ship
    Tow'rds Plymouth, and retreated with the rest.

    There, while the ships refitted with all haste
    And axe and hammer rang, one golden eve
    Just as the setting sun began to fringe
    The clouds with crimson, and the creaming waves
    Were one wild riot of fairy rainbows, Drake
    Stood with old comrades on the close-cropped green
    Of Plymouth Hoe, playing a game of bowls.
    Far off unseen, a little barque, full-sail,
    Struggled and leapt and strove tow'rds Plymouth Sound,
    Noteless as any speckled herring-gull
    Flickering between the white flakes of the waves.
    A group of schoolboys with their satchels lay
    Stretched on the green, gazing with great wide eyes
    Upon their seamen heroes, as like gods
    Disporting with the battles of the world
    They loomed, tossing black bowls like cannon-balls
    Against the rosy West, or lounged at ease
    With faces olive-dark against that sky
    Laughing, while from the neighboring inn mine host,
    White aproned and blue-jerkined, hurried out
    With foaming cups of sack, and they drank deep,
    Tossing their heads back under the golden clouds
    And burying their bearded lips. The hues
    That slashed their doublets, for the boy's bright eyes
    (Even as the gleams of Grecian cloud or moon
    Revealed the old gods) were here rich dusky streaks
    Of splendour from the Spanish Main, that shone
    But to proclaim these heroes. There a boy
    More bold crept nearer to a slouched hat thrown
    Upon the green, and touched the silver plume,
    And felt as if he had touched a sunset-isle
    Of feathery palms beyond a crimson sea.

    Another stared at the blue rings of smoke
    A storm-scarred seaman puffed from a long pipe
    Primed with the strange new herb they had lately found
    In far Virginia. But the little ship
    Now plunging into Plymouth Bay none saw.
    E'en when she had anchored and her straining boat
    Had touched the land, and the boat's crew over the quays
    Leapt with a shout, scarce was there one to heed.
    A seaman, smiling, swaggered out of the inn
    Swinging in one brown hand a gleaming cage
    Wherein a big green parrot chattered and clung
    Fluttering against the wires. A troop of girls
    With arms linked paused to watch the game of bowls;
    And now they flocked around the cage, while one
    With rosy finger tempted the horny beak
    To bite. Close overhead a sea-mew flashed
    Seaward. Once, from an open window, soft
    Through trellised leaves, not far away, a voice
    Floated, a voice that flushed the cheek of Drake,
    The voice of Bess, bending her glossy head
    Over the broidery frame, in a quiet song.

    The song ceased. Still, with rainbows in their eyes,
    The schoolboys watched the bowls like cannon-balls
    Roll from the hand of gods along the turf.

    Suddenly, tow'rds the green, a little cloud
    Of seamen, shouting, stumbling, as they ran
    Drew all eyes on them. The game ceased. A voice
    Rough with the storms of many an ocean roared
    "Drake! Cap'en Drake! The Armada!
    They are in the Channel! We sighted them--
    A line of battleships! We could not see
    An end of them. They stretch from north to south
    Like a great storm of clouds, glinting with guns,
    From sky to sky!"
                       So, after all his strife,
    The wasted weeks had tripped him, the fierce hours
    Of pleading for the sea's command, great hours
    And golden moments, all were lost. The fleet
    Of Spain had won the Channel without a blow.

    All eyes were turned on Drake, as he stood there
    A giant against the sunset and the sea
    Looming, alone. Far off, the first white star
    Gleamed in a rosy space of heaven. He tossed
    A grim black ball i' the lustrous air and laughed,--
    "Come lads," he said, "we've time to finish the game."


BOOK XI

    Few minutes, and well wasted those, were spent
    On that great game of bowls; for well knew Drake
    What panic threatened Plymouth, since his fleet
    Lay trapped there by the black head-wind that blew
    Straight up the Sound, and Plymouth town itself,
    Except the ships won seaward ere the dawn,
    Lay at the Armada's mercy. Never a seaman
    Of all the sea-dogs clustered on the quays,
    And all the captains clamouring round Lord Howard,
    Hoped that one ship might win to the open sea:
    At dawn, they thought, the Armada's rolling guns
    To windward, in an hour, must shatter them,
    Huddled in their red slaughter-house like sheep.

    Now was the great sun sunken and the night
    Dark. Far to Westward, like the soul of man
    Fighting blind nature, a wild flare of red
    Upon some windy headland suddenly leapt
    And vanished flickering into the clouds. Again
    It leapt and vanished: then all at once it streamed
    Steadily as a crimson torch upheld
    By Titan hands to heaven. It was the first
    Beacon! A sudden silence swept along
    The seething quays, and in their midst appeared
    Drake.
               Then the jubilant thunder of his voice
    Rolled, buffeting the sea-wind far and nigh,
    And ere they knew what power as of a sea
    Surged through them, his immortal battle-ship
    _Revenge_ had flung out cables to the quays,
    And while the seamen, as he had commanded,
    Knotted thick ropes together, he stood apart
    (For well he knew what panic threatened still)
    Whittling idly at a scrap of wood,
    And carved a little boat out for the child
    Of some old sea-companion.
    So great and calm a master of the world
    Seemed Drake that, as he whittled, and the chips
    Fluttered into the blackness over the quay,
    Men said that in this hour of England's need
    Each tiny flake turned to a battle-ship;
    For now began the lanthorns, one by one,
    To glitter, and half-reveal the shadowy hulks
    Before him.--So the huge old legend grew,
    Not all unworthy the Homeric age
    Of gods and god-like men.
                                 St. Michael's Mount,
    Answering the first wild beacon far away,
    Rolled crimson thunders to the stormy sky!
    The ropes were knotted. Through the panting dark
    Great heaving lines of seamen all together
    Hauled with a shout, and all together again
    Hauled with a shout against the roaring wind;
    And slowly, slowly, onward tow'rds the sea
    Moved the _Revenge_, and seaward ever heaved
    The brawny backs together, and in their midst,
    Suddenly, as they slackened, Drake was there
    Hauling like any ten, and with his heart
    Doubling the strength of all, giving them joy
    Of battle against those odds,--ay, till they found
    Delight in the burning tingle of the blood
    That even their hardy hands must feel besmear
    The harsh, rough, straining ropes. There as they toiled,
    Answering a score of hills, old Beachy Head
    Streamed like a furnace to the rolling clouds
    Then all around the coast each windy ness
    And craggy mountain kindled. Peak from peak
    Caught the tremendous fire, and passed it on
    Round the bluff East and the black mouth of Thames,--
    Up, northward to the waste wild Yorkshire fells
    And gloomy Cumberland, where, like a giant,
    Great Skiddaw grasped the red tempestuous brand,
    And thrust it up against the reeling heavens.
    Then all night long, inland, the wandering winds
    Ran wild with clamour and clash of startled bells;
    All night the cities seethed with torches, flashed
    With twenty thousand flames of burnished steel;
    While over the trample and thunder of hooves blazed forth
    The lightning of wild trumpets. Lonely lanes
    Of country darkness, lit by cottage doors
    Entwined with rose and honeysuckle, roared
    Like mountain-torrents now--East, West, and South,
    As to the coasts with pike and musket streamed
    The trained bands, horse and foot, from every town
    And every hamlet. All the shaggy hills
    From Milford Haven to the Downs of Kent,
    And up to Humber, gleamed with many a hedge
    Of pikes between the beacon's crimson glares;
    While in red London forty thousand men,
    In case the Invader should prevail, drew swords
    Around their Queen. All night in dark St. Paul's,
    While round it rolled a multitudinous roar
    As of the Atlantic on a Western beach,
    And all the leaning London streets were lit
    With fury of torches, rose the passionate prayer
    Of England's peril:
                            _O Lord God of Hosts,
    Let Thine enemies know that Thou hast taken
    England into Thine hands!_
                                  The mighty sound
    Rolled, billowing round the kneeling aisles, then died,
    Echoing up the heights. A voice, far off,
    As on the cross of Calvary, caught it up
    And poured the prayer o'er that deep hush, alone:
    _We beseech Thee, O God, to go before our armies,
    Bless and prosper them both by land and sea!
    Grant unto them Thy victory, O God,
    As Thou usedst to do to Thy children when they please Thee!
    All power, all strength, all victory come from Thee!_
    Then from the lips of all those thousands burst
    A sound as from the rent heart of an ocean,
    One tumult, one great rushing storm of wings
    Cleaving the darkness round the Gates of Heaven:
    _Some put their trust in chariots and some in horses;
    But we will remember Thy name, O Lord our God!_

    So, while at Plymouth Sound her seamen toiled
    All through the night, and scarce a ship had won
    Seaward, the heart of England cried to God.
    All night, while trumpets yelled and blared without,
    And signal cannon shook the blazoned panes,
    And billowing multitudes went thundering by,
    Amid that solemn pillared hush arose
    From lips of kneeling thousands one great prayer
    Storming the Gates of Heaven! _O Lord, our God,
    Heavenly Father, have mercy upon our Queen,
    To whom Thy far dispersed flock do fly
    In the anguish of their souls. Behold, behold,
    How many princes band themselves against her,
    How long Thy servant hath laboured to them for peace,
    How proudly they prepare themselves for battle!
    Arise, therefore! Maintain Thine own cause,
    Judge Thou between her and her enemies!
    She seeketh not her own honour, but Thine,
    Not the dominions of others, but Thy truth,
    Not bloodshed but the saving of the afflicted!
    O rend the heavens, therefore, and come down.
    Deliver Thy people!
    To vanquish is all one with Thee, by few
    Or many, ward or wealth, weakness or strength.
    The cause is Thine, the enemies Thine, the afflicted
    Thine! The honour, victory, and triumph
    Thine! Grant her people now one heart, one mind,
    One strength. Give unto her councils and her captains
    Wisdom and courage strongly to withstand
    The forces of her enemies, that the fame
    And glory of Thy Kingdom may be spread
    Unto the ends of the world. Father, we crave
    This in Thy mercy, for the precious death
    Of Thy dear Son, our Saviour, Jesus Christ!
    Amen._
    And as the dreadful dawn thro' mist-wreaths broke,
    And out of Plymouth Sound at last, with cheers
    Ringing from many a thousand throats, there struggled
    Six little ships, all that the night's long toil
    Had warped down to the sea (but leading them
    The ship of Drake) there rose one ocean-cry
    From all those worshippers--_Let God arise,
    And let His enemies be scattered!_

    Under the leaden fogs of that new dawn,
    Empty and cold, indifferent as death,
    The sea heaved strangely to the seamen's eyes,
    Seeing all round them only the leaden surge
    Wrapped in wet mists or flashing here and there
    With crumbling white. Against the cold wet wind
    Westward the little ships of England beat
    With short tacks, close inshore, striving to win
    The windward station of the threatening battle
    That neared behind the veil. Six little ships,
    No more, beat Westward, even as all mankind
    Beats up against that universal wind
    Whereon like withered leaves all else is blown
    Down one wide way to death: the soul alone,
    Whether at last it wins, or faints and fails,
    Stems the dark tide with its intrepid sails.
    Close-hauled, with many a short tack, struggled and strained,
    North-west, South-west, the ships; but ever Westward gained
    Some little way with every tack; and soon,
    While the prows plunged beneath the grey-gold noon,
    Lapped by the crackling waves, even as the wind
    Died down a little, in the mists behind
    Stole out from Plymouth Sound the struggling score
    Of ships that might not win last night to sea.
    They followed; but the Six went on before,
    Not knowing, alone, for God and Liberty.

    Now, as they tacked North-west, the sullen roar
      Of reefs crept out, or some strange tinkling sound
    Of sheep upon the hills. South-west once more
      The bo'sun's whistle swung their bowsprits round;
    South-west until the long low lapping splash
      Was all they heard, of keels that still ran out
    Seaward, then with one muffled heave and crash
      Once more the whistles brought their sails about.

    And now the noon began to wane; the west
      With slow rich colours filled and shadowy forms,
    Dark curdling wreaths and fogs with crimsoned breast,
      And tangled zones of dusk like frozen storms,

    Motionless, flagged with sunset, hulled with doom!
      Motionless? Nay, across the darkening deep
    Surely the whole sky moved its gorgeous gloom
      Onward; and like the curtains of a sleep

    The red fogs crumbled, mists dissolved away!
      There, like death's secret dawning thro' a dream,
    Great thrones of thunder dusked the dying day,
      And, higher, pale towers of cloud began to gleam.

    There, in one heaven-wide storm, great masts and clouds
      Of sail crept slowly forth, the ships of Spain!
    From North to South, their tangled spars and shrouds
      Controlled the slow wind as with bit and rein;
    Onward they rode in insolent disdain
      Sighting the little fleet of England there,
    While o'er the sullen splendour of the main
      Three solemn guns tolled all their host to prayer,
    And their great ensign blazoned all the doom-fraught air.

    The sacred standard of their proud crusade
      Up to the mast-head of their flag-ship soared:
    On one side knelt the Holy Mother-maid,
      On one the crucified Redeemer poured
    His blood, and all their kneeling hosts adored
      Their saints, and clouds of incense heavenward streamed,
    While pomp of cannonry and pike and sword
      Down long sea-lanes of mocking menace gleamed,
    And chant of priests rolled out o'er seas that darkly dreamed.

    _Who comes to fight for England?_ Is it ye,
      Six little straws that dance upon the foam?
    Ay, sweeping o'er the sunset-crimsoned sea
      Let the proud pageant in its glory come,
    Leaving the sunset like a hecatomb
      Of souls whose bodies yet endure the chain!
    Let slaves, by thousands, branded, scarred and dumb,
      In those dark galleys grip their oars again,
    And o'er the rolling deep bring on the pomp of Spain;--

    Bring on the pomp of royal paladins
      (For all the princedoms of the land are there!)
    And for the gorgeous purple of their sins
      The papal pomp bring on with psalm and prayer:
    Nearer the splendour heaves; can ye not hear
      The rushing foam, not see the blazoned arms,
    And black-faced hosts thro' leagues of golden air
      Crowding the decks, muttering their beads and charms
    To where, in furthest heaven, they thicken like locust-swarms?

    Bring on the pomp and pride of old Castille,
      Blazon the skies with royal Aragon,
    Beneath Oquendo let old ocean reel.
      The purple pomp of priestly Rome bring on;
    And let her censers dusk the dying sun,
      The thunder of her banners on the breeze
    Following Sidonia's glorious galleon
      Deride the sleeping thunder of the seas,
    While twenty thousand warriors chant her litanies.

    Lo, all their decks are kneeling! Sky to sky
      Responds! It is their solemn evening hour.
    Salve Regina, though the daylight die,
      Salve Regina, though the darkness lour;
    Have they not still the kingdom and the power?
      Salve Regina, hark, their thousands cry,
    From where like clouds to where like mountains tower
      Their crowded galleons looming far or nigh,
    Salve Regina, hark, what distant seas reply!

    What distant seas, what distant ages hear?
      Bring on the pomp! the sun of Spain goes down:
    The moon but swells the tide of praise and prayer;
      Bring on the world-wide pomp of her renown;
    Let darkness crown her with a starrier crown,
      And let her watch the fierce waves crouch and fawn
    Round those huge hulks from which her cannon frown,
      While close inshore the wet sea-mists are drawn
    Round England's Drake: then wait, in triumph, for the dawn.

    The sun of Rome goes down; the night is dark!
      Still are her thousands praying, still their cry
    Ascends from the wide waste of waters, hark!
      AVE MARIA, darker grows the sky!
    AVE MARIA, _those about to die
      Salute thee_! Nay, what wandering winds blaspheme
    With random gusts of chilling prophecy
      Against the solemn sounds that heavenward stream!
    The night is come at last. Break not the splendid dream.

        But through the misty darkness, close inshore,
        North-west, South-west, and ever Westward strained
        The little ships of England. All night long,
        As down the coast the reddening beacons leapt,
        The crackle and lapping splash of tacking keels,
        The bo'suns' low sharp whistles and the whine
        Of ropes, mixing with many a sea-bird's cry
        Disturbed the darkness, waking vague swift fears
        Among the mighty hulks of Spain that lay
        Nearest, then fading through the mists inshore
        North-west, then growing again, but farther down
        Their ranks to Westward with each dark return
        And dark departure, till the rearmost rank
        Of grim sea-castles heard the swish and creak
        Pass plashing seaward thro' the wet sea-mists
        To windward now of all that monstrous host,
        Then heard no more than wandering sea-birds' cries
        Wheeling around their leagues of lanthorn-light,
        Or heave of waters, waiting for the dawn.

    Dawn, everlasting and almighty dawn
      Rolled o'er the waters. The grey mists were fled.
    See, in their reeking heaven-wide crescent drawn
      Those masts and spars and cloudy sails, outspread
    Like one great sulphurous tempest soaked with red,
      In vain withstand the march of brightening skies:
    The dawn sweeps onward and the night is dead,
      And lo, to windward, what bright menace lies,
    What glory kindles now in England's wakening eyes?

    There, on the glittering plains of open sea,
      To windward now, behind the fleets of Spain,
    Two little files of ships are tossing free,
      Free of the winds and of the wind-swept main:
    Were they not trapped? Who brought them forth again,
      Free of the great new fields of England's war,
    With sails like blossoms shining after rain,
      And guns that sparkle to the morning star?
    Drake!--first upon the deep that rolls to Trafalgar!

    And Spain knows well that flag of fiery fame,
      Spain knows who leads those files across the sea;
    Implacable, invincible, his name
      _El Draque_, creeps hissing through her ranks to lee;
    But now she holds the rolling heavens in fee,
      His ships are few. _They surge across the foam,
    The hunt is up!_ But need the mountains flee
      Or fear the snarling wolf-pack? Let them come!
    They crouch, but dare not leap upon the flanks of Rome.

    Nearer they come and nearer! Nay, prepare!
      Close your huge ranks that sweep from sky to sky!
    Madness itself would shrink; but Drake will dare
      Eternal hell! Let the great signal fly--
    Close up your ranks; El Draque comes down to die!
      El Draque is brave! The vast sea-cities loom
    Thro' heaven: Spain spares one smile of chivalry,
      One wintry smile across her cannons' gloom
    As that frail fleet full-sail comes rushing tow'rds its doom.

    Suddenly, as the wild change of a dream,
    Even as the Spaniards watched those lean sharp prows
    Leap straight at their huge hulks, watched well content,
    Knowing their foes, once grappled, must be doomed;
    Even as they caught the rush and hiss of foam
    Across that narrow, dwindling gleam of sea,
    And heard, abruptly close, the sharp commands
    And steady British answers, caught one glimpse
    Of bare-armed seamen waiting by their guns,
    The vision changed! The ships of England swerved
    Swiftly--a volley of flame and thunder swept
    Blinding the buffeted air, a volley of iron
    From four sheer broadsides, crashing thro' a hulk
    Of Spain. She reeled, blind in the fiery surge
    And fury of that assault. So swift it seemed
    That as she heeled to leeward, ere her guns
    Trained on the foe once more, the sulphurous cloud
    That wrapped the sea, once, twice, and thrice again
    Split with red thunder-claps that rent and raked
    Her huge beams through and through. Ay, as she heeled
    To leeward still, her own grim cannon belched
    Their lava skyward, wounding the void air,
    And, as by miracle, the ships of Drake
    Were gone. Along the Spanish rear they swept
    From North to South, raking them as they went
    At close range, hardly a pistol-shot away,
    With volley on volley. Never Spain had seen
    Seamen or marksmen like to these who sailed
    Two knots against her one. They came and went,
    Suddenly neared or sheered away at will
    As if by magic, pouring flame and iron
    In four full broadsides thro' some Spanish hulk
    Ere one of hers burst blindly at the sky.
    Southward, along the Spanish rear they swept,
    Then swung about, and volleying sheets of flame,
    Iron, and death, along the same fierce road
    Littered with spars, reeking with sulphurous fumes,
    Returned, triumphantly rushing, all their sails
    Alow, aloft, full-bellied with the wind.

    Then, then, from sky to sky, one mighty surge
      Of baleful pride, huge wrath, stormy disdain,
    With shuddering clouds and towers of sail would urge
      Onward the heaving citadels of Spain,
    Which dragged earth's thunders o'er the groaning main,
      And held the panoplies of faith in fee,
    Beating against the wind, struggling in vain
      To close with that swift ocean-cavalry:
    Spain had all earth in charge! Had England, then, the sea?

    Spain had the mountains--mountains flow like clouds.
      Spain had great kingdoms--kingdoms melt away!
    Yet, in that crescent, army on army crowds,
      How shall she fear what seas or winds can say?--
    The seas that leap and shine round earth's decay,
      The winds that mount and sing while empires fall,
    And mountains pass like waves in the wind's way,
      And dying gods thro' shuddering twilights call.
    Had England, then, the sea that sweeps o'er one and all?

    See, in gigantic wrath the _Rata_ hurls
      Her mighty prows round to the wild sea-wind:
    The deep like one black maelstrom round her swirls
      While great Recaldé follows hard behind:
    Reeling, like Titans, thunder-blasted, blind,
      They strive to cross the ships of England--yea,
    Challenge them to the grapple, and only find
      Red broadsides bursting o'er the bursting spray,
    And England surging still along her windward way!

    To windward still _Revenge_ and _Raleigh_ flash
      And thunder, and the sea flames red between:
    In vain against the wind the galleons crash
      And plunge and pour blind volleys thro' the screen
    Of rolling sulphurous clouds at dimly seen
      Topsails that, to and fro, like sea-birds fly!
    Ever to leeward the great hulks careen;
      Their thousand cannon can but wound the sky,
    While England's little _Rainbow_ foams and flashes by.

    Suddenly the flag-ship of Recaldé, stung
    To fury it seemed, heeled like an avalanche
    To leeward, then reeled out beyond the rest
    Against the wind, alone, daring the foe
    To grapple her. At once the little _Revenge_
    With Drake's flag flying flashed at her throat,
    And hardly a cable's-length away out-belched
    Broadside on broadside, under those great cannon,
    Crashing through five-foot beams, four shots to one,
    While Howard and the rest swept to and fro
    Keeping at deadly bay the rolling hulks
    That looming like Leviathans now plunged
    Desperately against the freshening wind
    To rescue the great flag-ship where she lay
    Alone, amid the cannonades of Drake,
    Alone, like a volcanic island lashed
    With crimson hurricanes, dinning the winds
    With isolated thunders, flaking the skies
    With wrathful lava, while great spars and blocks
    Leapt through the cloudy glare and fell, far off,
    Like small black stones into the hissing sea.

    Oquendo saw her peril far away!
      His rushing prow thro' heaven begins to loom,
    Oquendo, first in all that proud array,
      Hath heart the pride of Spain to reassume:
    He comes; the rolling seas are dusked with gloom
      Of his great sails! Now round him once again,
    Thrust out your oars, ye mighty hulks of doom;
      Forward, with hiss of whip and clank of chain!
    Let twice ten hundred slaves bring on the wrath of Spain!

    Sidonia comes! Toledo comes!--huge ranks
      That rally against the storm from sky to sky,
    As down the dark blood-rusted chain-locked planks
      Of labouring galleys the dark slave-guards ply
    Their knotted scourges, and the red flakes fly
      From bare scarred backs that quiver and heave once more,
    And slaves that heed not if they live or die
      Pull with numb arms at many a red-stained oar,
    Nor know the sea's dull crash from cannon's growing roar.

    Bring on the wrath! From heaven to rushing heaven
      The white foam sweeps around their fierce array;
    In vain before their shattering crimson levin
      The ships of England flash and dart away:
    Not England's heart can hold that host at bay!
      See, a swift signal shoots along her line,
    Her ships are scattered, they fly, they fly like spray
      Driven against the wind by wrath divine,
    While, round Recaldé now, Sidonia's cannon shine.

    The wild sea-winds with golden trumpets blaze!
      One wave will wash away the crimson stain
    That blots Recaldé's decks. Her first amaze
      Is over: down the Channel once again
    Turns the triumphant pageantry of Spain
      In battle-order, now. Behind her, far,
    While the broad sun sinks to the Western main,
      Glitter the little ships of England's war,
    And over them in heaven glides out the first white star.

    The sun goes down: the heart of Spain is proud:
      Her censers fume, her golden trumpets blow!
    Into the darkening East with cloud on cloud
      Of broad-flung sail her huge sea-castles go:
    Rich under blazoned poops like rose-flushed snow
      Tosses the foam. Far off the sunset gleams:
    Her banners like a thousand sunsets glow,
      As down the darkening East the pageant streams,
    Full-fraught with doom for England, rigged with princely dreams.

    Nay, "rigged with curses dark," as o'er the waves
    Drake watched them slowly sweeping into the gloom
    That thickened down the Channel, watched them go
    In ranks compact, roundels impregnable,
    With Biscay's bristling broad-beamed squadron drawn
    Behind for rear-guard. As the sun went down
    Drake flew the council-flag. Across the sea
    That gleamed still like a myriad-petalled rose
    Up to the little _Revenge_ the pinnaces foamed.

    There, on Drake's powder-grimed escutcheoned poop
    They gathered, Admirals and great flag-captains,
    Hawking, Frobisher, shining names and famous,
    And some content to serve and follow and fight
    Where duty called unknown, but heroes all.
    High on the poop they clustered, gazing East
    With faces dark as iron against the flame
    Of sunset, eagle-faces, iron lips,
    And keen eyes fiercely flashing as they turned
    Like sword-flames now, or dark and deep as night
    Watching the vast Armada slowly mix
    Its broad-flung sails with twilight where it dragged
    Thro' thickening heavens its curdled storms of clouds
    Down the wide darkening Channel.
                                         "My Lord Howard,"
    Said Drake, "it seems we have but scarred the skins
    Of those huge hulks: the hour grows late for England.
    'Twere well to handle them again at once." A growl
    Of fierce approval answered; but Lord Howard
    Cried out, "Attack we cannot, save at risk
    Of our whole fleet. It is not death I fear,
    But England's peril. We have fought all day,
    Accomplished nothing. Half our powder is spent!
    I think it best to hang upon their flanks
    Till we be reinforced."
                          "My lord," said Drake,
    "Had we that week to spare for which I prayed,
    And were we handling them in Spanish seas,
    We might delay. There is no choosing now.
    Yon hulks of doom are steadfastly resolved
    On one tremendous path and solid end--
    To join their powers with Parma's thirty thousand
    (Not heeding our light horsemen of the sea),
    Then in one earthquake of o'erwhelming arms
    Roll Europe over England. They've not grasped
    The first poor thought which now and evermore
    Must be the sceptre of Britain, the steel trident
    Of ocean-sovereignty. That mighty fleet
    Invincible, impregnable, omnipotent,
    Must here and now be shattered, never be joined
    With Parma, never abase the wind-swept sea,
    With oaken roads for thundering legions
    To trample in the splendour of the sun
    From Europe to our island.
                                  As for food,
    In yonder enemy's fleet there is food enough
    To feed a nation; ay, and powder enough
    To split an empire. I will answer for it
    Ye shall not lack of either, nor for shot,
    Not though ye pluck them out of your own beams
    To feed your hungry cannon. Cast your bread
    Upon the waters. Think not of the Queen!
    She will not send it! For she hath not known
    (How could she know?) this wide new realm of hers,
    When we ourselves--her seamen--scarce have learnt
    What means this kingdom of the ocean-sea
    To England and her throne--food, life-blood, life!
    She could not understand who, when our ships
    Put out from Plymouth, hardly gave them store
    Of powder and shot to last three fighting days,
    Or rations even for those. Blame not the Queen,
    Who hath striven for England as no king hath fought
    Since England was a nation. Bear with me,
    For I must pour my heart before you now
    This one last time. Yon fishing-boats have brought
    Tidings how on this very day she rode
    Before her mustered pikes at Tilbury.
    Methinks I see her riding down their lines
    High on her milk-white Barbary charger, hear
    Her voice--'My people, though my flesh be woman,
    My heart is of your kingly lion's breed:
    I come myself to lead you!' I see the sun
    Shining upon her armour, hear the voice
    Of all her armies roaring like one sea--
    _God save Elizabeth, our English Queen!_
    'God save her,' I say, too; but still she dreams,
    As all too many of us--bear with me!--dream,
    Of Crécy, when our England's war was thus;
    When we, too, hurled our hosts across the deep
    As now Spain dreams to hurl them on our isle.
    But now our war is otherwise. We claim
    The sea's command, and Spain shall never land
    One swordsman on our island. Blame her not,
    But look not to the Queen. The people fight
    This war of ours, not princes. In this hour
    God maketh us a people. We have seen
    Victories, never victory like to this,
    When in our England's darkest hour of need
    Her seamen, without wage, powder, or food,
    Are yet on fire to fight for her. Your ships
    Tossing in the great sunset of an Empire,
    Dawn of a sovereign people, are all manned
    By heroes, raggèd, hungry, who will die
    Like flies ere long, because they have no food
    But turns to fever-breeding carrion
    Not fit for dogs. They are half-naked, hopeless
    Living, of any reward; and if they die
    They die a dog's death. We shall reap the fame
    While they--great God! and all this cannot quench
    The glory in their eyes. They will be served
    Six at the mess of four, eking it out
    With what their own rude nets may catch by night,
    Silvering the guns and naked arms that haul
    Under the stars with silver past all price,
    While some small ship-boy in the black crow's nest
    Watches across the waters for the foe.
    My lord, it is a terrible thing for Spain
    When poor men thus go out against her princes;
    For so God whispers 'Victory' in our ears,
    I cannot dare to doubt it."

                                 Once again
    A growl of fierce approval answered him,
    And Hawkins cried--"I stand by Francis Drake";
    But Howard, clinging to his old-world order,
    Yet with such manly strength as dared to rank
    Drake's wisdom of the sea above his own,
    Sturdily shook his head. "I dare not risk
    A close attack. Once grappled we are doomed.
    We'll follow on their trail no less, with Drake
    Leading. Our oriflamme to-night shall be
    His cresset and stern-lanthorn. Where that shines
    We follow."

                  Drake, still thinking in his heart,--
    "And if Spain be not shattered here and now
    We are doomed no less," must even rest content
    With that good vantage.
                                As the sunset died
    Over the darkling emerald seas that swelled
    Before the freshening wind, the pinnaces dashed
    To their own ships; and into the mind of Drake
    There stole a plot that twitched his lips to a smile.
    High on the heaving purple of the poop
    Under the glimmer of firm and full-blown sails
    He stood, an iron statue, glancing back
    Anon at his stern-cresset's crimson flare,
    The star of all the shadowy ships that plunged
    Like ghosts amid the grey stream of his wake,
    And all around him heard the low keen song
    Of hidden ropes above the wail and creak
    Of blocks and long low swish of cloven foam,
    A keen rope-music in the formless night,
    A harmony, a strong intent good sound,
    Well-strung and taut, singing the will of man.
    "Your oriflamme," he muttered,--"so you travail
    With sea-speech in the tongue of old Poictiers--
    Shall be my own stern-lanthorn. Watch it well,
    My good Lord Howard."
                               Over the surging seas
    The little _Revenge_ went swooping on the trail,
    Leading the ships of England. One by one
    Out of the gloom before them slowly crept,
    Sinister gleam by gleam, like blood-red stars,
    The rearmost lanthorns of the Spanish Fleet,
    A shaggy purple sky of secret storm
    Heaving from north to south upon the black
    Breast of the waters. Once again with lips
    Twitched to a smile, Drake suddenly bade them crowd
    All sail upon the little _Revenge_. She leapt
    Forward. Smiling he watched the widening gap
    Between the ships that followed and her light,
    Then as to those behind, its flicker must seem
    Wellnigh confused with those of Spain, he cried,
    "Now, master bo'sun, quench their oriflamme,
    Dip their damned cresset in the good black Sea!
    The rearmost light of Spain shall lead them now,
    A little closer, if they think it ours.
    Pray God, they come to blows!"
                                       Even as he spake
    His cresset-flare went out in the thick night;
    A fluttering as of blind bewildered moths
    A moment seized upon the shadowy ships
    Behind him, then with crowded sail they steered
    Straight for the rearmost cresset-flare of Spain.


BOOK XII

    Meanwhile, as in the gloom he slipped aside
    Along the Spanish ranks, waiting the crash
    Of battle, suddenly Drake became aware
    Of strange sails bearing up into the wind
    Around his right, and thought, "the Armada strives
    To weather us in the dark." Down went his helm,
    And all alone the little _Revenge_ gave chase,
    Till as the moon crept slowly forth, she stood
    Beside the ghostly ships, only to see
    Bewildered Flemish merchantmen, amazed
    With fears of Armageddon--such vast shrouds
    Had lately passed them on the rolling seas.
    Down went his helm again, with one grim curse
    Upon the chance that led him thus astray;
    And down the wind the little _Revenge_ once more
    Swept on the trail. Fainter and fainter now
    Glared the red beacons on the British coasts,
    And the wind slackened and the glimmering East
    Greyed and reddened, yet Drake had not regained
    Sight of the ships. When the full glory of dawn
    Dazzled the sea, he found himself alone,
    With one huge galleon helplessly drifting
    A cable's-length away. Around her prow,
    _Nuestra Señora del Rosario_,
    Richly emblazoned, gold on red, proclaimed
    The flagship of great Valdes, of the fleet
    Of Andalusia, captain-general. She,
    Last night, in dark collision with the hulks
    Of Spain, had lost her foremast. Through the night
    Her guns, long rank on deadly rank, had kept
    All enemies at bay. Drake summoned her
    Instantly to surrender. She returned
    A scornful answer from the glittering poop
    Where two-score officers crowned the golden sea
    And stained the dawn with blots of richer colour
    Loftily clustered in the glowing sky,
    Doubleted with cramoisy velvet, wreathed
    With golden chains, blazing with jewelled swords
    And crusted poignards. "What proud haste was this?"
    They asked, glancing at their huge tiers of cannon
    And crowded decks of swarthy soldiery;
    "What madman in yon cockle-shell defied Spain?"
                  "Tell them it is El Draque," he said, "who lacks
    The time to parley; therefore it will be well
    They strike at once, for I am in great haste."
    There, at the sound of that renownèd name,
    Without a word down came their blazoned flag.
    Like a great fragment of the dawn it lay
    Crumpled upon their decks.. . .

    Into the soft bloom and Italian blue
    Of sparkling, ever-beautiful Torbay,
    Belted as with warm Mediterranean crags,
    The little _Revenge_ foamed with her mighty prize,
    A prize indeed--not for the casks of gold
    Drake split in the rich sunlight and poured out
    Like dross amongst his men, but in her hold
    Lay many tons of powder, worth their weight
    In rubies now to Britain. Into the hands
    Of swarthy Brixham fishermen he gave
    Prisoners and prize, then--loaded stem to stern
    With powder and shot--their swiftest trawlers flew
    Like falcons following a thunder-cloud
    Behind him, as with crowded sail he rushed
    On England's trail once more. Like a caged lion
    Drake paced his deck, praying he yet might reach
    The fight in time; and ever the warm light wind
    Slackened. Not till the sun was half-way fallen
    Once more crept out in front those dusky thrones
    Of thunder, heaving on the smooth bright sea
    From North to South with Howard's clustered fleet
    Like tiny clouds, becalmed, not half a mile
    Behind the Spaniards. For the breeze had failed
    Their blind midnight pursuit; and now attack
    Seemed hopeless. Even as Drake drew nigh, the last
    Breath of the wind sank. One more day had flown,
    Nought was accomplished; and the Armada lay
    Some leagues of golden sea-way nearer now
    To its great goal. The sun went down: the moon
    Rose glittering. Hardly a cannon-shot apart
    The two fleets lay becalmed upon the silver
    Swell of the smooth night-tide. The hour had come
    For Spain to strike. The ships of England drifted
    Helplessly, at the mercy of those great hulks
    Oared by their thousand slaves.
                                     Onward they came,
    Swinging suddenly in tremendous gloom
    Over the silver seas. But even as Drake,
    With eyes on fire at last for his last fight,
    Measured the distance ere he gave the word
    To greet it with his cannon, suddenly
    The shining face of the deep began to shiver
    With dusky patches: the doomed English sails
    Quivered and, filling smart from the North-east,
    The little _Revenge_ rushed down their broken line
    Signalling them to follow, and ere they knew
    What miracle had saved them, they all sprang
    Their luff and ran large out to sea. For now
    The Armada lay to windward, and to fight
    Meant to be grappled and overwhelmed; but dark
    Within the mind of Drake, a fiercer plan
    Already had shaped itself.
                              "They fly! They fly!"
    Rending the heavens from twice ten thousand throats
    A mighty shout rose from the Spanish Fleet.
    Over the moonlit waves their galleons came
    Towering, crowding, plunging down the wind
    In full chase, while the tempter, Drake, laughed low
    To watch their solid battle-order break
    And straggle. When once more the golden dawn
    Dazzled the deep, the labouring galleons lay
    Scattered by their unequal speed. The wind
    Veered as the sun rose. Once again the ships
    Of England lay to windward. Down swooped Drake
    Where like a mountain the _San Marcos_ heaved
    Her giant flanks alone, having out-sailed
    Her huge companions. Then the sea-winds blazed
    With broadsides. Two long hours the sea flamed red
    All round her. One by one the Titan ships
    Came surging to her rescue, and met the buffet
    Of battle-thunders, belching iron and flame;
    Nor could they pluck her forth from that red chaos
    Till great Oquendo hurled his mighty prows
    Crashing athwart those thunders, and once more
    Gathered into unshakeable battle-order
    The whole Armada raked the reeking seas.
    Then up the wind the ships of England sheered
    Once more, and one more day drew to its close,
    With little accomplished, half their powder spent,
    And all the Armada moving as of old,
    From sky to sky one heaven-wide zone of storm,
    (Though some three galleons out of all their host
    Laboured woundily) down the darkening Channel.
    And all night long on England's guardian heights
    The beacons reddened, and all the next long day
    The impregnable Armada never swerved
    From its tremendous path. In vain did Drake,
    Frobisher, Hawkins, Howard, greatest names
    In all our great sea-history, hover and dart
    Like falcons round the mountainous array.
    Till now, as night fell and they lay abreast
    Of the Isle of Wight, once more the council flag
    Flew from the little _Revenge_. With iron face
    Thrust close to Howard's, and outstretched iron arm,
    Under the stars Drake pointed down the coast
    Where the red beacons flared. "The shoals," he hissed,
    "The shoals from Owers to Spithead and the net
    Of channels yonder in Portsmouth Roads. At dawn
    They'll lie to leeward of the Invincible Fleet!"

              Swiftly, in mighty sweeping lines Drake set
    Before the council his fierce battle-plan
    To drive the Armada down upon the banks
    And utterly shatter it--stroke by well-schemed stroke
    As he unfolded there his vital plot
    And touched their dead cold warfare into life
    Where plan before was none, he seemed to tower
    Above them, clad with the deep night of stars;
    And those that late would rival knew him now,
    In all his great simplicity, their king,
    One of the gods of battle, England's Drake,
    A soul that summoned Cæsar from his grave,
    And swept with Alexander o'er the deep.

    So when the dawn thro' rolling wreaths of cloud
    Struggled, and all the waves were molten gold,
    The heart of Spain exulted, for she saw
    The little fleet of England cloven in twain
    As if by some strange discord. A light breeze
    Blew from the ripening East; and, up against it,
    Urged by the very madness of defeat,
    Or so it seemed, one half the British fleet
    Drew nigh, towed by their boats, to challenge the vast
    Tempest-winged heaving citadels of Spain,
    At last to the murderous grapple; while far away
    Their other half, led by the flag of Drake,
    Stood out to sea, as if to escape the doom
    Of that sheer madness, for the light wind now
    Could lend them no such wings to hover and swoop
    As heretofore. Nearer the mad ships came
    Towed by their boats, till now upon their right
    To windward loomed the Fleet Invincible
    With all its thunder-clouds, and on their left
    To leeward, gleamed the perilous white shoals
    With their long level lightnings under the cliffs
    Of England, from the green glad garden of Wight
    To the Owers and Selsea Bill. Right on they came,
    And suddenly the wrench of thundering cannon
    Shook the vast hulks that towered above them. Red
    Flamed the blue sea between. Thunder to thunder
    Answered, and still the ships of Drake sped out
    To the open sea. Sidonia saw them go,
    Furrowing the deep that like a pale-blue shield
    Lay diamond-dazzled now in the full light.
    Rich was the omen of that day for Spain,
    The feast-day of Sidonia's patron-saint!
    And the priests chanted and the trumpets blew
    Triumphantly! A universal shout
    Went skyward from the locust-swarming decks,
    A shout that rent the golden morning clouds
    From heaven to menacing heaven, as castle to castle
    Flew the great battle-signal, and like one range
    Of moving mountains, those almighty ranks
    Swept down upon the small forsaken ships!
    The lion's brood was in the imperial nets
    Of Spain at last. Onward the mountains came
    With all their golden clouds of sail and flags
    Like streaming cataracts; all their glorious chasms
    And glittering steeps, echoing, re-echoing,
    Calling, answering, as with the herald winds
    That blow the golden trumpets of the morning
    From Skiddaw to Helvellyn. In the midst
    The great _San Martin_ surged with heaven-wide press
    Of proudly billowing sail; and yet once more
    Slowly, solemnly, like another dawn
    Up to her mast-head soared in thunderous gold
    The sacred standard of their last crusade;
    While round a hundred prows that heaved thro' heaven
    Like granite cliffs, their black wet shining flanks,
    And swept like moving promontories, rolled
    The splendid long-drawn thunders of the foam,
    And flashed the untamed white lightnings of the sea
    Back to a morn unhalyarded of man,
    Back to the unleashed sun and blazoned clouds
    And azure sky--the unfettered flag of God.

       *   *   *   *

    Like one huge moving coast-line on they came
      Crashing, and closed the ships of England round
    With one fierce crescent of thunder and sweeping flame,
      One crimson scythe of Death, whose long sweep drowned
    The eternal ocean with its mighty sound,
      From heaven to heaven, one roar, one glitter of doom,
    While out to the sea-line's blue remotest bound
      The ships of Drake still fled, and the red fume
    Of battle thickened and shrouded shoal and sea with gloom.

    The distant sea, the close white menacing shoals
      Are shrouded! And the lion's brood fight on!
    And now death's very midnight round them rolls;
      Rent is the flag that late so proudly shone!
    The red decks reel and their last hope seems gone!
      Round them they still keep clear one ring of sea:
    It narrows; but the lion's brood fight on,
      Ungrappled still, still fearless and still free,
    While the white menacing shoals creep slowly out to lee.

    Now through the red rents of each fire-cleft cloud,
      High o'er the British blood-greased decks flash out
    Thousands of swarthy faces, crowd on crowd
      Surging, with one tremendous hurricane shout
    _On, to the grapple_! and still the grim redoubt
      Of the oaken bulwarks rolls them back again,
    As buffeted waves that shatter in the furious bout
      When cannonading cliffs meet the full main
    And hurl it back in smoke--so Britain hurls back Spain;

    Hurls her back, only to see her return,
      Darkening the heavens with billow on billow of sail:
    Round that huge storm the waves like lava burn,
      The daylight withers, and the sea-winds fail!
    Seamen of England, what shall now avail
      Your naked arms? Before those blasts of doom
    The sun is quenched, the very sea-waves quail:
      High overhead their triumphing thousands loom,
    When hark! what low deep guns to windward suddenly boom?

    What low deep strange new thunders far away
      Respond to the triumphant shout of Spain?
    Is it the wind that shakes their giant array?
      Is it the deep wrath of the rising main?
    Is it--_El Draque_? El Draque! Ay, shout again,
      His thunders burst upon your windward flanks;
    The shoals creep out to leeward! Is it plain
      At last, what earthquake heaves your herded ranks
    Huddled in huge dismay tow'rds those white foam-swept banks?

    Plain, it was plain at last, what cunning lured,
    What courage held them over the jaws o' the pit,
    Till Drake could hurl them down. The little ships
    Of Howard and Frobisher, towed by their boats,
    Slipped away in the smoke, while out at sea
    Drake, with a gale of wind behind him, crashed
    Volley on volley into the helpless rear
    Of Spain and drove it down, huddling the whole
    Invincible Fleet together upon the verge
    Of doom. One awful surge of stormy wrath
    Heaved thro' the struggling citadels of Spain.
    From East to West their desperate signal flew,
    And like a drove of bullocks, with the foam
    Flecking their giant sides, they staggered and swerved,
    Careening tow'rds the shallows as they turned,
    Then in one wild stampede of sheer dismay
    Rushed, tacking seaward, while the grey sea-plain
    Smoked round them, and the cannonades of Drake
    Raked their wild flight; and the crusading flag,
    Tangled in one black maze of crashing spars,
    Whirled downward like the pride of Lucifer
    From heaven to hell.
                            Out tow'rds the coasts of France
    They plunged, narrowly weathering the Ower banks;
    Then, once again, they formed in ranks compact,
    Roundels impregnable, wrathfully bent at last
    Never to swerve again from their huge path
    And solid end--to join with Parma's host,
    And hurl the whole of Europe on our isle.
    Another day was gone, much powder spent;
    And, while Lord Howard exulted and conferred
    Knighthoods on his brave seamen, Drake alone
    Knew that his mighty plan, in spite of all,
    Had failed, knew that wellnigh his last great chance
    Was lost of wrecking the Spaniards ere they joined
    Parma. The night went by, and the next day,
    With scarce a visible scar the Invincible Fleet
    Drew onwards tow'rds its goal, unshakeable now
    In that grim battle-order. Beacons flared
    Along the British coast, and pikes flashed out
    All night, and a strange dread began to grip
    The heart of England, as it seemed the might
    Of seamen most renowned in all the world
    Checked not that huge advance. Yet at the heart
    Of Spain no less there clung a vampire fear
    And strange foreboding, as the next day passed
    Quietly, and behind her all day long
    The shadowy ships of Drake stood on her trail
    Quietly, patiently, as death or doom,
    Unswerving and implacable.
                                    While the sun
    Sank thro' long crimson fringes on that eve.
    The fleets were passing Calais and the wind
    Blew fair behind them. A strange impulse seized
    Spain to shake off those bloodhounds from her trail,
    And suddenly the whole Invincible Fleet
    Anchored, in hope the following wind would bear
    The ships of England past and carry them down
    To leeward. But their grim insistent watch
    Was ready; and though their van had wellnigh crashed
    Into the rear of Spain, in the golden dusk,
    They, too, a cannon-shot away, at once
    Anchored, to windward still.
                                  Quietly heaved
    The golden sea in that tremendous hour
    Fraught with the fate of Europe and mankind,
    As yet once more the flag of council flew,
    And Hawkins, Howard, Frobisher, and Drake
    Gathered together upon the little _Revenge_
    While like a triumphing fire the news was borne
    To Spain, already, that the Invincible Fleet
    Had reached its end, ay, and "that great black dog
    Sir Francis Drake" was writhing now in chains
    Beneath the torturer's hands.
                                   High on his poop
    He stood, a granite rock, above the throng
    Of captains, there amid the breaking waves
    Of clashing thought and swift opinion,
    Silent, gazing where now the cool fresh wind
    Blew steadily up the terrible North Sea
    Which rolled under the clouds into a gloom
    Unfathomable. Once only his lips moved
    Half-consciously, breathing those mighty words,
    _The clouds His chariot_! Then, suddenly, he turned
    And looked upon the little flock of ships
    That followed on the fleet of England, sloops
    Helpless in fight. These, manned by the brave zeal
    Of many a noble house, from hour to hour
    Had plunged out from the coast to join his flag.
    "Better if they had brought us powder and food
    Than sought to join us thus," he had growled; but now
    "Lord God," he cried aloud, "they'll light our road
    To victory yet!" And in great sweeping strokes
    Once more he drew his mighty battle-plan
    Before the captains. In the thickening gloom
    They stared at his grim face as at a man
    Risen from hell, with all the powers of hell
    At his command, a face tempered like steel
    In the everlasting furnaces, a rock
    Of adamant, while with a voice that blent
    With the ebb and flow of the everlasting sea
    He spake, and at the low deep menacing words
    Monotonous with the unconquerable
    Passion and level strength of his great soul
    They shuddered; for the man seemed more than man,
    And from his iron lips resounded doom
    As from the lips of cannon, doom to Spain,
    Inevitable, unconquerable doom.

    And through that mighty host of Spain there crept
      Cold winds of fear, as to the darkening sky
    Once more from lips of kneeling thousands swept
      The vespers of an Empire--one vast cry,
    SALVE REGINA! God, what wild reply
      Hissed from the clouds in that dark hour of dreams?
    AVE MARIA, _those about to die
      Salute thee_! See, what ghostly pageant streams
    Above them? What thin hands point down like pale moonbeams?

    Thick as the ghosts that Dante saw in hell
      Whirled on the blast thro' boundless leagues of pain,
    Thick, thick as wind-blown leaves innumerable,
      In the Inquisition's yellow robes her slain
    And tortured thousands, dense as the red rain
      That wellnigh quenched her fires, went hissing by
    With twisted shapes, raw from the racks of Spain,
      Salve Regina!--rushing thro' the sky,
    And pale hands pointing down and lips that mocked her cry,

    Ten thousand times ten thousand!--what are these
      That are arrayed in yellow robes and sweep
    Between your prayers and God like phantom seas
      Prophesying over your masts? Could Rome not keep
    The keys? Who loosed these dead to break your sleep?
      SALVE REGINA, cry, yea, cry aloud.
    AVE MARIA! Ye have sown: shall ye not reap?
      SALVE REGINA! Christ, what fiery cloud
    Suddenly rolls to windward, high o'er mast and shroud?

    Are hell-gates burst at last? For the black deep
      To windward burns with streaming crimson fires!
    Over the wild strange waves, they shudder and creep
      Nearer--strange smoke-wreathed masts and spars, red
        spires
    And blazing hulks, vast roaring blood-red pyres,
      Fierce as the flames ye fed with flesh of men
    Amid the imperial pomp and chanting choirs
      Of Alva--from El Draque's red hand again
    Sweep the wild fire-ships down upon the Fleet of Spain.

    Onward before the freshening wind they come
      Full fraught with all the terrors, all the bale
    That flamed so long for the delight of Rome,
      The shrieking fires that struck the sunlight pale,
    The avenging fires at last! Now what avail
      Your thousand ranks of cannon? Swift, cut free,
    Cut your scorched cables! Cry, reel backward, quail,
      Crash your huge huddled ranks together, flee!
    Behind you roars the fire, before--the dark North Sea!

    Dawn, everlasting and omnipotent
    Dawn rolled in crimson o'er the spar-strewn waves,
    As the last trumpet shall in thunder roll
    O'er heaven and earth and ocean. Far away,
    The ships of Spain, great ragged piles of gloom
    And shaggy splendour, leaning to the North
    Like sun-shot clouds confused, or rent apart
    In scattered squadrons, furiously plunged,
    Burying their mighty prows i' the broad grey rush
    Of smoking billowy hills, or heaving high
    Their giant bowsprits to the wandering heavens,
    Labouring in vain to return, struggling to lock
    Their far-flung ranks anew, but drifting still
    To leeward, driven by the ever-increasing storm
    Straight for the dark North Sea. Hard by there lurched
    One gorgeous galleon on the ravening shoals,
    Feeding the white maw of the famished waves
    With gold and purple webs from kingly looms
    And spilth of world-wide empires. Howard, still
    Planning to pluck the Armada plume by plume,
    Swooped down upon that prey and swiftly engaged
    Her desperate guns; while Drake, our ocean-king,
    Knowing the full worth of that doom-fraught hour,
    Glanced neither to the left nor right, but stood
    High on his poop, with calm implacable face
    Gazing as into eternity, and steered
    The crowded glory of his dawn-flushed sails
    In superb onset, straight for the great fleet
    Invincible; and after him the main
    Of England's fleet, knowing its captain now,
    Followed, and with them rushed--from sky to sky
    One glittering charge of wrath--the storm's white waves,
    The twenty thousand foaming chariots
    Of God.
                 None but the everlasting voice
    Of him who fought at Salamis might sing
    The fight of that dread Sabbath. Not mankind
    Waged it alone. War raged in heaven that day,
    Where Michael and his angels drave once more
    The hosts of darkness ruining down the abyss
    Of chaos. Light against darkness, Liberty
    Against all dark old despotism, unsheathed
    The sword in that great hour. Behind the strife
    Of men embattled deeps beyond all thought
    Moved in their awful panoply, as move
    Silent, invisible, swift, under the clash
    Of waves and flash of foam, huge ocean-glooms
    And vast reserves of inappellable power.
    The bowsprits ranked on either fore-front seemed
    But spear-heads of those dread antagonists
    Invisible: the shuddering sails of Spain
    Dusk with the shadow of death, the sunward sails
    Of England full-fraught with the breath of God.
    Onward the ships of England and God's waves
    Triumphantly charged, glittering companions,
    And poured their thunders on the extreme right
    Of Spain, whose giant galleons as they lurched
    Heavily to the roughening sea and wind
    With all their grinding, wrenching cannon, worked
    On rolling platforms by the helpless hands
    Of twenty thousand soldiers, without skill
    In stormy seas, rent the indifferent sky
    Or tore the black troughs of the swirling deep
    In vain, while volley on volley of flame and iron
    Burst thro' their four-foot beams, fierce raking blasts
    From ships that came and went on wings of the wind
    All round their mangled bulk, scarce a pike's thrust
    Away, sweeping their decks from stem to stern
    (Between the rush and roar of the great green waves)
    With crimson death, rending their timbered towns
    And populous floating streets into wild squares
    Of slaughter and devastation; driving them down,
    Huddled on their own centre, cities of shame
    And havoc, in fiery forests of tangled wrath,
    With hurricanes of huge masts and swarming spars
    And multitudinous decks that heaved and sank
    Like earthquake-smitten palaces, when doom
    Comes, with one stride, across the pomp of kings.
    All round them shouted the everlasting sea,
    Burst in white thunders on the streaming poops
    And blinded fifty thousand eyes with spray.
    Once, as a gorgeous galleon, drenched with blood
    Began to founder and settle, a British captain
    Called from his bulwarks, bidding her fierce crew
    Surrender and come aboard. Straight through the heart
    A hundred muskets answered that appeal.
    _Sink or destroy_! The deadly signal flew
    From mast to mast of England. Once, twice, thrice,
    A huge sea-castle heaved her haggled bulk
    Heavenward, and with a cry that rent the heavens
    From all her crowded decks, and one deep roar
    As of a cloven world or the dark surge
    Of chaos yawning, sank: the swirling slopes
    Of the sweeping billowy hills for a moment swarmed
    With struggling insect-men, sprinkling the foam
    With tossing arms; then the indifferent sea
    Rolled its grey smoking waves across the place
    Where they had been. Here a great galleasse poured
    Red rivers through her scuppers and torn flanks,
    And there a galleon, wrapped in creeping fire,
    Suddenly like a vast volcano split
    Asunder, and o'er the vomiting sulphurous clouds
    And spouting spread of crimson, flying spars
    And heads torn from their trunks and scattered limbs
    Leapt, hideous gouts of death, against the glare.
    Hardly the thrust of a pike away, the ships
    Of England flashed and swerved, till in one mass
    Of thunder-blasted splendour and shuddering gloom
    Those gorgeous floating citadels huddled and shrank
    Their towers, and all the glory of dawn that rolled
    And burned along the tempest of their banners
    Withered, as on a murderer's face the light
    Withers before the accuser. All their proud
    Castles and towers and heaven-wide clouds of sail
    Shrank to a darkening horror, like the heart
    Of Evil, plucked from midnight's fiercest gloom,
    With all its curses quivering and alive;
    A horror of wild masts and tangled spars,
    Like some great kraken with a thousand arms
    Torn from the filthiest cavern of the deep,
    Writhing, and spewing forth its venomous fumes
    On every side. _Sink or destroy_!--all day
    The deadly signal flew; and ever the sea
    Swelled higher, and the flashes of the foam
    Broadened and leapt and spread as a wild white fire
    That flourishes with the wind; and ever the storm
    Drave the grim battle onward to the wild
    Menace of the dark North Sea. At set of sun,
    Even as below the sea-line the broad disc
    Sank like a red-hot cannon-ball through scurf
    Of seething molten lead, the _Santa Maria_
    Uttering one cry that split the heart of heaven
    Went down with all hands, roaring into the dark.
    Hardly five rounds of shot were left to Drake!
    Gun after gun fell silent, as the night
    Deepened--"Yet we must follow them to the North,"
    He cried, "or they'll return yet to shake hands
    With Parma! Come, we'll put a brag upon it,
    And hunt them onward as we lacked for nought!"
    So, when across the swinging smoking seas,
    Grey and splendid and terrible broke the day
    Once more, the flying Invincible fleet beheld
    Upon their weather-beam, and dogging them
    Like their own shadow, the dark ships of Drake,
    Unswerving and implacable. Ever the wind
    And sea increased; till now the heaving deep
    Swelled all around them into sulky hills
    And rolling mountains, whose majestic crests,
    Like wild white flames far blown and savagely flickering
    Swept thro' the clouds; and, on their vanishing slopes,
    Past the pursuing fleet began to swirl
    Scores of horses and mules, drowning or drowned,
    Cast overboard to lighten the wild flight
    Of Spain, and save her water-casks, a trail
    Telling of utmost fear. And ever the storm
    Soared louder across the leagues of rioting sea,
    Driving her onward like a mighty stag
    Chased by the wolves. Off the dark Firth of Forth
    At last, Drake signalled and lay head to wind,
    Watching. "The chariots of God are twenty thousand,"
    He muttered, as, for a moment close at hand,
    Caught in some league-wide whirlpool of the sea,
    The mighty galleons crowded and towered and plunged
    Above him on the huge o'erhanging billows,
    As if to crash down on his decks; the next,
    A mile of ravening sea had swept between
    Each of those wind-whipt straws and they were gone,
    With all their tiny shrivelling scrolls of sail,
    Through roaring deserts of embattled death,
    Where like a hundred thousand chariots charged
    With lightnings and with thunders, the great deep
    Hurled them away to the North. From sky to sky
    One blanching bursting storm of infinite seas
    Followed them, broad white cataracts, hills that grasped
    With struggling Titan hands at reeling heavens,
    And roared their doom-fraught greetings from Cape Wrath
    Round to the Bloody Foreland.
                                       There should the yeast
    Of foam receive the purple of many kings,
    And the grim gulfs devour the blood-bought gold
    Of Aztecs and of Incas, and the reefs,
    League after league, bristle with mangled spars,
    And all along their coasts the murderous kerns
    Of Catholic Ireland strip the gorgeous silks
    And chains and jewel-encrusted crucifixes
    From thousands dead, and slaughter thousands more
    With gallow-glass axes as they blindly crept
    Forth from the surf and jagged rocks to seek
    Pity of their own creed.
                                To meet that doom
    Drake watched their sails go shrivelling, till the last
    Flicker of spars vanished as a skeleton leaf
    Upon the blasts of winter, and there was nought
    But one wide wilderness of splendour and gloom
    Under the northern clouds.
                                "Not unto us,"
    Cried Drake, "not unto us--but unto Him
    Who made the sea, belongs our England now!
    Pray God that heart and mind and soul we prove
    Worthy among the nations of this hour
    And this great victory, whose ocean fame
    Shall wash the world with thunder till that day
    When there is no more sea, and the strong cliffs
    Pass like a smoke, and the last peal of it
    Sounds thro' the trumpet."
                                    So, with close-hauled sails,
    Over the rolling triumph of the deep,
    Lifting their hearts to heaven, they turned back home.


MIST IN THE VALLEY


    I

    Mist in the valley, weeping mist
      Beset my homeward way.
    No gleam of rose or amethyst
      Hallowed the parting day;
    A shroud, a shroud of awful grey
      Wrapped every woodland brow,
    And drooped in crumbling disarray
      Around each wintry bough.


    II

    And closer round me now it clung
      Until I scarce could see
    The stealthy pathway overhung
      By silent tree and tree
    Which floated in that mystery
      As--poised in waveless deeps--
    Branching in worlds below the sea,
      The grey sea-forest sleeps.


    III

    Mist in the valley, mist no less
      Within my groping mind!
    The stile swam out: a wilderness
      Rolled round it, grey and blind.
    A yard in front, a yard behind,
      So strait my world was grown,
    I stooped to win once more some kind
      Glimmer of twig or stone.


    IV

    I crossed and lost the friendly stile
      And listened. Never a sound
    Came to me. Mile on mile on mile
      It seemed the world around
    Beneath some infinite sea lay drowned
      With all that e'er drew breath;
    Whilst I, alone, had strangely found
      A moment's life in death.


    V

    A universe of lifeless grey
      Oppressed me overhead.
    Below, a yard of clinging clay
      With rotting foliage red
    Glimmered. The stillness of the dead,
      Hark!--was it broken now
    By the slow drip of tears that bled
      From hidden heart or bough.


    VI

    Mist in the valley, mist no less
      That muffled every cry
    Across the soul's grey wilderness
      Where faith lay down to die;
    Buried beyond all hope was I,
      Hope had no meaning there:
    A yard above my head the sky
      Could only mock at prayer.


    VII

    E'en as I groped along, the gloom
      Suddenly shook at my feet!
    O, strangely as from a rending tomb
      In resurrection, sweet
    Swift wings tumultuously beat
      Away! I paused to hark--
    O, birds of thought, too fair, too fleet
      To follow across the dark!


    VIII

    Yet, like a madman's dream, there came
      One fair swift flash to me
    Of distances, of streets a-flame
      With joy and agony,
    And further yet, a moon-lit sea
      Foaming across its bars,
    And further yet, the infinity
      Of wheeling suns and stars,


    IX

    And further yet ... O, mist of suns
      I grope amidst your light,
    O, further yet, what vast response
      From what transcendent height?
    Wild wings that burst thro' death's dim night
      I can but pause and hark;
    For O, ye are too swift, too white,
      To follow across the dark!


    X

    Mist in the valley, yet I saw,
      And in my soul I knew
    The gleaming City whence I draw
      The strength that then I drew,
    My misty pathway to pursue
      With steady pulse and breath
    Through these dim forest-ways of dew
      And darkness, life and death.




A SONG OF THE PLOUGH


    I

    (_Morning._)

    Idle, comfortless, bare,
      The broad bleak acres lie:
    The ploughman guides the sharp ploughshare
      Steadily nigh.

    The big plough-horses lift
      And climb from the marge of the sea,
    And the clouds of their breath on the clear wind drift
      Over the fallow lea.

    Streaming up with the yoke,
      Brown as the sweet-smelling loam,
    Thro' a sun-swept smother of sweat and smoke
      The two great horses come.

    Up thro' the raw cold morn
      They trample and drag and swing;
    And my dreams are waving with ungrown corn
      In a far-off spring.

    It is my soul lies bare
      Between the hills and the sea:
    Come, ploughman Life, with thy sharp ploughshare,
      And plough the field for me.


    II

    (_Evening._)

    Over the darkening plain
      As the stars regain the sky,
    Steals the chime of an unseen rein
      Steadily nigh.

    Lost in the deepening red
      The sea has forgotten the shore:
    The great dark steeds with their muffled tread
      Draw near once more.

    To the furrow's end they sweep
      Like a sombre wave of the sea,
    Lifting its crest to challenge the deep
      Hush of Eternity.

    Still for a moment they stand,
      Massed on the sun's red death,
    A surge of bronze, too great, too grand,
      To endure for more than a breath.

    Only the billow and stream
      Of muscle and flank and mane
    Like darkling mountain-cataracts gleam
      Gripped in a Titan's rein.

    Once more from the furrow's end
      They wheel to the fallow lea,
    And down the muffled slope descend
      To the sleeping sea.

    And the fibrous knots of clay,
      And the sun-dried clots of earth
    Cleave, and the sunset cloaks the grey
      Waste and the stony dearth!

    O, broad and dusky and sweet,
      The sunset covers the weald;
    But my dreams are waving with golden wheat
      In a still strange field.

    My soul, my soul lies bare,
      Between the hills and the sea;
    Come, ploughman Death, with thy sharp ploughshare,
      And plough the field for me.




THE BANNER


    Who in the gorgeous vanguard of the years
      With wingèd helmet glistens, let him hold
    Ere he pluck down this banner, crying "It bears
      An old device"; for, though it seem the old,

    It is the new! No rent shroud of the past,
      But its transfigured spirit that still shines
      Triumphantly before the foremost lines,
    Even from the first prophesying the last.

    And whoso dreams to pluck it down shall stand
      Bewildered, while the great host thunders by;
    And he shall show the rent shroud in his hand
      And "Lo, I lead the van!" he still shall cry;

    While leagues away, the spirit-banner shines
    Rushing in triumph before the foremost lines.




RANK AND FILE


    I

    Drum-taps! Drum-taps! Who is it marching,
      Marching past in the night? Ah, hark,
        Draw your curtains aside and see
    Endless ranks of the stars o'er-arching
    Endless ranks of an army marching,
      Marching out of the measureless dark,
        Marching away to Eternity.


    II

    See the gleam of the white sad faces
      Moving steadily, row on row,
        Marching away to their hopeless wars:
    Drum-taps, drum-taps, where are they marching?
    Terrible, beautiful, human faces,
      Common as dirt, but softer than snow,
        Coarser than clay, but calm as the stars.


    III

    Is it the last rank readily, steadily
      Swinging away to the unknown doom?
        Ere you can think it, the drum-taps beat
    Louder, and here they come marching, marching,
    Great new level locked ranks of them readily
      Steadily swinging out of the gloom
        Marching endlessly down the street.


    IV

    Unregarded imperial regiments
      White from the roaring intricate places
        Deep in the maw of the world's machine,
    Well content, they are marching, marching,
    Unregarded imperial regiments,
      Ay, and there are those terrible faces
        Great world-heroes that might have been.


    V

    Hints and facets of One--the Eternal,
      Faces of grief, compassion and pain,
        Faces of hunger, faces of stone,
    Faces of love and of labour, marching,
    Changing facets of One--the Eternal,
      Streaming up thro' the wind and the rain,
        All together and each alone.


    VI

    You that doubt of the world's one Passion,
      You for whose science the stars are a-stray,
        Hark--to their orderly thunder-tread!
    These, in the night, with the stars are marching
    One to the end of the world's one Passion!
      You that have taken their Master away,
        Where have you laid Him, living or dead?


    VII

    You whose laws have hidden the One Law,
      You whose searchings obscure the goal,
        You whose systems from chaos begun,
    Chance-born, order-less, hark, they are marching,
    Hearts and tides and stars to the One Law,
      Measured and orderly, rhythmical, whole,
        Multitudinous, welded and one.


    VIII

    Split your threads of the seamless purple,
      Round you marches the world-wide host,
        Round your skies is the marching sky,
    Out in the night there's an army marching,
    Clothed with the night's own seamless purple,
      Making death for the King their boast,
        Marching straight to Eternity.


    IX

    What do you know of the shot-riddled banners
      Royally surging out of the gloom,
        You whose denials their souls despise?
    Out in the night they are marching, marching!
    Treasure your wisdom, and leave them their banners!
      Then--when you follow them down to the tomb
        Pray for one glimpse of the faith in their eyes.


    X

    Pray for one gleam of the white sad faces,
      Moving steadily, row on row,
        Marching away to their hopeless wars,
    Doomed to be trodden like dung, but marching,
    Terrible, beautiful human faces,
      Common as dirt, but softer than snow,
        Coarser than clay, but calm as the stars.


    XI

    What of the end? Will your knowledge escape it?
      What of the end of their dumb dark tears?
        You who mock at their faith and sing,
    Look, for their ragged old banners are marching
    Down to the end--will your knowledge escape it?--
      Down to the end of a few brief years!
        What should they care for the wisdom you bring.


    XII

    Count as they pass, their hundreds, thousands,
      Millions, marching away to a doom
        Younger than London, older that Tyre!
    Drum-taps, drum-taps, where are they marching,
    Regiments, nations, empires, marching?
      Down thro' the jaws of a world-wide tomb,
        Doomed or ever they sprang from the mire!


    XIII

    Doomed to be shovelled like dung to the midden,
      Trodden and kneaded as clay in the road,
        Father and little one, lover and friend,
    Out in the night they are marching, marching,
    Doomed to be shovelled like dung to the midden,
      Bodies that bowed beneath Christ's own load,
        Love that--marched to the self-same end.


    XIV

    What of the end?--O, not of your glory,
      Not of your wealth or your fame that will live
        Half as long as this pellet of dust!--
    Out in the night there's an army marching,
    Nameless, noteless, empty of glory,
      Ready to suffer and die and forgive,
        Marching onward in simple trust,


    XV

    Wearing their poor little toy love-tokens
      Under the march of the terrible skies!
        Is it a jest for a God to play?--
    Whose is the jest of these millions marching,
    Wearing their poor little toy love-tokens,
      Waving their voicelessly grand good-byes,
        Secretly trying, sometimes, to pray.


    XVI

    Dare you dream their trust in Eternity
      Broken, O you to whom prayers are vain,
        You who dream that their God is dead?
    Take your answer--these millions marching
    Out of Eternity, into Eternity,
      These that smiled "We shall meet again,"
        Even as the life from their loved one fled.


    XVII

    This is the answer, not of the sages,
      Not of the loves that are ready to part,
        Ready to find their oblivion sweet!
    Out in the night there's an army marching,
    Men that have toiled thro' the endless ages,
      Men of the pit and the desk and the mart,
        Men that remember, the men in the street,


    XVIII

    These that into the gloom of Eternity
      Stream thro' the dream of this lamp-starred town
        London, an army of clouds to-night!
    These that of old came marching, marching,
    Out of the terrible gloom of Eternity,
      Bowing their heads at Rameses' frown,
        Streaming away thro' Babylon's light;


    XIX

    These that swept at the sound of the trumpet
      Out thro' the night like gonfaloned clouds,
        Exiled hosts when the world was Rome,
    Tossing their tattered old eagles, marching
    Down to sleep till the great last trumpet,
      London, Nineveh, rend your shrouds,
        Rally the legions and lead them home,


    XX

    Lead them home with their glorious faces
      Moving steadily, row on row
        Marching up from the end of wars,
    Out of the Valley of Shadows, marching,
    Terrible, beautiful, human faces,
      Common as dirt, but softer than snow,
        Coarser than clay, but calm as the stars,


    XXI

    Marching out of the endless ages,
      Marching out of the dawn of time,
        Endless columns of unknown men,
    Endless ranks of the stars o'er-arching
    Endless ranks of an army marching
    Numberless out of the numberless ages,
      Men out of every race and clime,
        Marching steadily, now as then.




THE SKY-LARK CAGED


    I

    Beat, little breast, against the wires.
      Strive, little wings and misted eyes
    Which one wild gleam of memory fires
      Beseeching still the unfettered skies,
    Whither at dewy dawn you sprang
    Quivering with joy from this dark earth and sang.


    II

    And still you sing--your narrow cage
      Shall set at least your music free!
    Its rapturous wings in glorious rage
      Mount and are lost in liberty,
    While those who caged you creep on earth
    Blind prisoners from the hour that gave them birth.


    III

    Sing! The great City surges round.
      Blinded with light, thou canst not know.
    Dream! 'Tis the fir-woods' windy sound
      Rolling a psalm of praise below.
    Sing, o'er the bitter dust and shame,
    And touch us with thine own transcendent flame.


    IV

    Sing, o'er the City dust and slime;
      Sing, o'er the squalor and the gold,
    The greed that darkens earth with crime,
      The spirits that are bought and sold.
    O, shower the healing notes like rain,
    And lift us to the height of grief again.


    V

    Sing! The same music swells your breast,
      And the wild notes are still as sweet
    As when above the fragrant nest
      And the wide billowing fields of wheat
    You soared and sang the livelong day,
    And in the light of heaven dissolved away.


    VI

    The light of heaven! Is it not here?
      One rapture, one ecstatic joy,
    One passion, one sublime despair,
      One grief which nothing can destroy,
    You--though your dying eyes are wet
    Remember, 'tis our blunted hearts forget.


    VII

    Beat, little breast, still beat, still beat,
      Strive, misted eyes and tremulous wings;
    Swell, little throat, your _Sweet! Sweet! Sweet!_
      Thro' which such deathless memory rings:
    Better to break your heart and die,
    Than, like your gaolers, to forget your sky.




THE LOVERS' FLIGHT


    I

    Come, the dusk is lit with flowers!
      Quietly take this guiding hand:
    Little breath to waste is ours
      On the road to lovers' land.
    Time is in his dungeon-keep!
      Ah, not thither, lest he hear,
    Starting from his old grey sleep,
      Rosy feet upon the stair.


    II

    Ah, not thither, lest he heed
      Ere we reach the rusty door!
    Nay, the stairways only lead
      Back to his dark world once more:
    There's a merrier way we know
      Leading to a lovelier night--
    See, your casement all a-glow
      Diamonding the wonder-light.


    III

    Fling the flowery lattice wide,
      Let the silken ladder down,
    Swiftly to the garden glide
      Glimmering in your long white gown,
    Rosy from your pillow, sweet,
      Come, unsandalled and divine;
    Let the blossoms stain your feet
      And the stars behold them shine.


    IV

    Swift, our pawing palfreys wait,
      And the page--Dan Cupid--frets,
    Holding at the garden gate
      Reins that chime like castanets,
    Bits a-foam with fairy flakes
      Flung from seas whence Venus rose:
    Come, for Father Time awakes
      And the star of morning glows.


    V

    Swift--one satin foot shall sway
      Half a heart-beat in my hand,
    Swing to stirrup and swift away
      Down the road to lovers' land:
    Ride--the moon is dusky gold,
      Ride--our hearts are young and warm,
    Ride--the hour is growing old,
      And the next may break the charm.


    VI

    Swift, ere we that thought the song
      Full--for others--of the truth,
    We that smiled, contented, strong,
      Dowered with endless wealth of youth,
    Find that like a summer cloud
      Youth indeed has crept away,
    Find the robe a clinging shroud
      And the hair be-sprent with grey.


    VII

    Ride--we'll leave it all behind,
      All the turmoil and the tears,
    All the mad vindictive blind
      Yelping of the heartless years!
    Ride--the ringing world's in chase,
      Yet we've slipped old Father Time,
    By the love-light in your face
      And the jingle of this rhyme.


    VIII

    Ride--for still the hunt is loud!
      Ride--our steeds can hold their own!
    Yours, a satin sea-wave, proud,
      Queen, to be your living throne,
    Glittering with the foam and fire
      Churned from seas whence Venus rose,
    Tow'rds the gates of our desire
      Gloriously burning flows.


    IX

    He, with streaming flanks a-smoke,
      Needs no spur of blood-stained steel:
    Only that soft thudding stroke
      Once, o' the little satin heel,
    Drives his mighty heart, your slave,
      Bridled with these bells of rhyme,
    Onward, like a crested wave
      Thundering out of hail of Time.


    X

    On, till from a rosy spark
      Fairy-small as gleams your hand,
    Broadening as we cleave the dark,
      Dawn the gates of lovers' land,
    Nearing, sweet, till breast and brow
      Lifted through the purple night
    Catch the deepening glory now
      And your eyes the wonder-light.


    XI

    E'en as tow'rd your face I lean
      Swooping nigh the gates of bliss,
    I the king and you the queen
      Crown each other with a kiss.
    Riding, soaring like a song
      Burn we tow'rds the heaven above,
    You the sweet and I the strong
      And in both the fire of love.


    XII

    Ride--though now the distant chase
      Knows that we have slipped old Time,
    Lift the love-light of your face,
      Shake the bridle of this rhyme,
    See, the flowers of night and day
      Streaming past on either hand,
    Ride into the eternal May,
      Ride into the lovers' land.




THE ROCK POOL


    I

    Bright as a fallen fragment of the sky,
      Mid shell-encrusted rocks the sea-pool shone,
    Glassing the sunset-clouds in its clear heart,
    A small enchanted world enwalled apart
            In diamond mystery,
    Content with its own dreams, its own strict zone
      Of urchin woods, its fairy bights and bars,
      Its daisy-disked anemones and rose-feathered stars.


    II

    Forsaken for awhile by that deep roar
      Which works in storm and calm the eternal will,
    Drags down the cliffs, bids the great hills go by
    And shepherds their multitudinous pageantry,--
            Here, on this ebb-tide shore
    A jewelled bath of beauty, sparkling still,
      The little sea-pool smiled away the sea,
      And slept on its own plane of bright tranquillity.


    III

    A self-sufficing soul, a pool in trance,
      Un-stirred by all the spirit-winds that blow
    From o'er the gulfs of change, content, ere yet
    On its own crags, which rough peaked limpets fret
            The last rich colours glance,
    Content to mirror the sea-bird's wings of snow,
      Or feel in some small creek, ere sunset fails,
      A tiny Nautilus hoist its lovely purple sails;


    IV

    And, furrowing into pearl that rosy bar,
      Sail its own soul from fairy fringe to fringe,
    Lured by the twinkling prey 'twas born to reach
    In its own pool, by many an elfin beach
            Of jewels, adventuring far
    Through the last mirrored cloud and sunset-tinge
      And past the rainbow-dripping cave where lies
      The dark green pirate-crab at watch with beaded eyes,


    V

    Or fringed Medusa floats like light in light,
      Medusa, with the loveliest of all fays
    Pent in its irised bubble of jellied sheen,
    Trailing long ferns of moonlight, shot with green
            And crimson rays and white,
    Waving ethereal tendrils, ghostly sprays,
      Daring the deep, dissolving in the sun,
      The vanishing point of life, the light whence life begun.


    VI

    Poised between me, light, time, eternity,
      So tinged with all, that in its delicate brain
    Kindling it as a lamp with her bright wings
    Day-long, night-long, young Ariel sits and sings
            Echoing the lucid sea,
    Listening it echo her own unearthly strain,
      Watching through lucid walls the world's rich tide,
      One light, one substance with her own, rise and subside.


    VII

    And over soft brown woods, limpid, serene,
      Puffing its fans the Nautilus went its way,
    And from a hundred salt and weedy shelves
    Peered little hornèd faces of sea-elves:
            The prawn darted, half-seen,
    Thro' watery sunlight, like a pale green ray,
      And all around, from soft green waving bowers,
      Creatures like fruit out-crept from fluted shells like flowers.


    VIII

    And, over all, that glowing mirror spread
      The splendour of its heaven-reflecting gleams,
    A level wealth of tints, calm as the sky
    That broods above our own mortality:
            The temporal seas had fled,
    And ah, what hopes, what fears, what mystic dreams
      Could ruffle it now from any deeper deep?
      Content in its own bounds it slept a changeless sleep.


    IX

    Suddenly, from that heaven beyond belief,
      Suddenly, from that world beyond its ken,
    Dashing great billows o'er its rosy bars,
    Shivering its dreams into a thousand stars,
            Flooding each sun-dried reef
    With waves of colour, (as once, for mortal men
      Bethesda's angel) with blue eyes, wide and wild,
      Naked into the pool there stepped a little child.


    X

    Her red-gold hair against the far green sea
      Blew thickly out: her slender golden form
    Shone dark against the richly waning West
    As with one hand she splashed her glistening breast,
            Then waded up to her knee
    And frothed the whole pool into a fairy storm!...
      So, stooping through our skies, of old, there came
      Angels that once could set this world's dark pool a-flame,


    XI

    From which the seas of faith have ebbed away,
      Leaving the lonely shore too bright, too bare,
    While mirrored softly in the smooth wet sand
    A deeper sunset sees its blooms expand
            But all too phantom-fair,
    Between the dark brown rocks and sparkling spray
      Where the low ripples pleaded, shrank and sighed,
      And tossed a moment's rainbow heavenward ere they died.


    XII

    Stoop, starry souls, incline to this dark coast,
      Where all too long, too faithlessly, we dream.
    Stoop to the world's dark pool, its crags and scars,
    Its yellow sands, its rosy harbour-bars,
            And soft green wastes that gleam
    But with some glorious drifting god-like ghost
      Of cloud, some vaguely passionate crimson stain:
      Rend the blue waves of heaven, shatter our sleep again!




THE ISLAND HAWK

(A SONG FOR THE FIRST LAUNCHING OF HIS MAJESTY'S AERIAL NAVY)


    I

    _Chorus_--
        _Ships have swept with my conquering name
          Over the waves of war,
        Swept thro' the Spaniards' thunder and flame
          To the splendour of Trafalgar:
        On the blistered decks of their great renown,
          In the wind of my storm-beat wings,
        Hawkins and Hawke went sailing down
          To the harbour of deep-sea kings!
             By the storm-beat wings of the hawk, the hawk,
               Bent beak and pitiless breast,
             They clove their way thro' the red sea-fray:
               Who wakens me now to the quest?_


    II

    Hushed are the whimpering winds on the hill,
      Dumb is the shrinking plain,
    And the songs that enchanted the woods are still
      As I shoot to the skies again!
    Does the blood grow black on my fierce bent beak,
      Does the down still cling to my claw?
    Who brightened these eyes for the prey they seek?
      Life, I follow thy law!
          _For I am the hawk, the hawk, the hawk!
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the wild wind's way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    III

    As I glide and glide with my peering head,
      Or swerve at a puff of smoke,
    Who watcheth my wings on the wind outspread,
      Here--gone--with an instant stroke?
    Who toucheth the glory of life I feel
      As I buffet this great glad gale,
    Spire and spire to the cloud-world, wheel,
      Loosen my wings and sail?
          _For I am the hawk, the island hawk,
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the sun's bright way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    IV

    Had they given me "Cloud-cuckoo-city" to guard
      Between mankind and the sky,
    Tho' the dew might shine on an April sward,
      Iris had ne'er passed by!
    Swift as her beautiful wings might be
      From the rosy Olympian hill,
    Had Epops entrusted the gates to me
      Earth were his kingdom still.
          _For I am the hawk, the archer, the hawk!
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the wild wind's way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    V

    My mate in the nest on the high bright tree
      Blazing with dawn and dew,
    She knoweth the gleam of the world and the glee
      As I drop like a bolt from the blue;
    She knoweth the fire of the level flight
      As I skim, close, close to the ground,
    With the long grass lashing my breast and the bright
      Dew-drops flashing around.
          _She watcheth the hawk, the hawk, the hawk,
            (O, the red-blotched eggs in the nest!)
          Watcheth him sway in the sun's bright way;
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    VI

    She builded her nest on the high bright wold,
      She was taught in a world afar,
    The lore that is only an April old
      Yet old as the evening star;
    Life of a far off ancient day
      In an hour unhooded her eyes;
    In the time of the budding of one green spray
      She was wise as the stars are wise.
          _Brown flower of the tree of the hawk, the hawk,
            On the old elm's burgeoning breast,
          She watcheth me sway in the wild wind's way;
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    VII

    Spirit and sap of the sweet swift Spring,
      Fire of our island soul,
    Burn in her breast and pulse in her wing
      While the endless ages roll;
    Avatar--she--of the perilous pride
      That plundered the golden West,
    Her glance is a sword, but it sweeps too wide
      For a rumour to trouble her rest.
          _She goeth her glorious way, the hawk,
            She nurseth her brood alone;
          She will not swoop for an owlet's whoop,
            She hath calls and cries of her own._


    VIII

    There was never a dale in our isle so deep
      That her wide wings were not free
    To soar to the sovran heights and keep
      Sight of the rolling sea:
    Is it there, is it here in the rolling skies,
      The realm of her future fame?
    Look once, look once in her glittering eyes,
      Ye shall find her the same, the same.
           _Up to the sides with the hawk, the hawk,
               As it was in the days of old!
           Ye shall sail once more, ye shall soar, ye shall soar
             To the new-found realms of gold._


    IX

    She hath ridden on white Arabian steeds
      Thro' the ringing English dells,
    For the joy of a great queen, hunting in state,
      To the music of golden bells;
    A queen's fair fingers have drawn the hood
      And tossed her aloft in the blue,
    A white hand eager for needless blood;
      I hunt for the needs of two.
          _Yet I am the hawk, the hawk, the hawk!
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the sun's bright way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    X

    Who fashioned her wide and splendid eyes
      That have stared in the eyes of kings?
    With a silken twist she was looped to their wrist:
      She has clawed at their jewelled rings!
    Who flung her first thro' the crimson dawn
      To pluck him a prey from the skies,
    When the love-light shone upon lake and lawn
      In the valleys of Paradise?
          _Who fashioned the hawk, the hawk, the hawk,
            Bent beak and pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth him sway in the wild wind's way?
                Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    XI

    Is there ever a song in all the world
      Shall say how the quest began
    With the beak and the wings that have made us kings
      And cruel--almost--as man?
    The wild wind whimpers across the heath
      Where the sad little tufts of blue
    And the red-stained grey little feathers of death
      Flutter! _Who fashioned us? Who?
          Who fashioned the scimitar wings of the hawk,
            Bent beak and arrowy breast?
          Who watcheth him sway in the sun's bright way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    XII

    Linnet and woodpecker, red-cap and jay,
      Shriek that a doom shall fall
    One day, one day, on my pitiless way
      From the sky that is over us all;
    But the great blue hawk of the heavens above
      Fashioned the world for his prey,--
    King and queen and hawk and dove,
      We shall meet in his clutch that day;
          _Shall I not welcome him, I, the hawk?
            Yea, cry, as they shrink from his claw,
          Cry, as I die, to the unknown sky,
            Life, I follow thy law!_


    XIII

    _Chorus--_
         _Ships have swept with my conquering name ..._
           Over the world and beyond,
         Hark! Bellerophon, Marlborough, Thunderer,
           Condor, respond!--
         _On the blistered decks of their dread renown,
           In the rush of my storm-beat wings,
         Hawkins and Hawke went sailing down
           To the glory of deep-sea kings!
               By the storm-beat wings of the hawk, the hawk,
                 Bent beak and pitiless breast,
               They clove their way thro' the red sea-fray!
                 Who wakens me now to the quest._




THE ADMIRAL'S GHOST


    I tell you a tale to-night
      Which a seaman told to me,
    With eyes that gleamed in the lanthorn light
      And a voice as low as the sea.

    You could almost hear the stars
      Twinkling up in the sky,
    And the old wind woke and moaned in the spars,
      And the same old waves went by,

    Singing the same old song
      As ages and ages ago,
    While he froze my blood in that deep-sea night
      With the things that he seemed to know.

    A bare foot pattered on deck;
      Ropes creaked; then--all grew still,
    And he pointed his finger straight in my face
      And growled, as a sea-dog will.

    "Do' ee know who Nelson was?
      That pore little shrivelled form
    With the patch on his eye and the pinned-up sleeve
      And a soul like a North Sea storm?

    "Ask of the Devonshire men!
      They know, and they'll tell you true;
    He wasn't the pore little chawed-up chap
      That Hardy thought he knew.

    "He wasn't the man you think!
      His patch was a dern disguise!
    For he knew that they'd find him out, d'you see,
      If they looked him in both his eyes.

    "He was twice as big as he seemed;
      But his clothes were cunningly made.
    He'd both of his hairy arms all right!
      The sleeve was a trick of the trade.

    "You've heard of sperrits, no doubt;
      Well, there's more in the matter than that!
    But he wasn't the patch and he wasn't the sleeve,
      And he wasn't the laced cocked-hat.

    "_Nelson was just--a Ghost!_
      You may laugh! But the Devonshire men
    They knew that he'd come when England called,
      And they know that he'll come again.

    "I'll tell you the way it was
      (For none of the landsmen know),
    And to tell it you right, you must go a-starn
      Two hundred years or so.

       *   *   *   *

    "The waves were lapping and slapping
      The same as they are to-day;
    And Drake lay dying aboard his ship
      In Nombre Dios Bay.

    "The scent of the foreign flowers
      Came floating all around;
    'But I'd give my soul for the smell o' the pitch,'
      Says he, 'in Plymouth Sound.'

    "'What shall I do,' he says,
      'When the guns begin to roar,
    An' England wants me, and me not there
      To shatter 'er foes once more?'

    "(You've heard what he said, maybe,
      But I'll mark you the p'ints again;
    For I want you to box your compass right
      And get my story plain.)

    "'You must take my drum,' he says,
      'To the old sea-wall at home;
    And if ever you strike that drum,' he says,
      'Why, strike me blind, I'll come!

    "'If England needs me, dead
    Or living, I'll rise that day!
    I'll rise from the darkness under the sea
      Ten thousand miles away.'

    "That's what he said; and he died,
      An' his pirates, listenin' roun',
    With their crimson doublets and jewelled swords
      That flashed as the sun went down,

    "They sewed him up in his shroud
      With a round-shot top and toe,
    To sink him under the salt sharp sea
      Where all good seamen go.

    "They lowered him down in the deep,
      And there in the sunset light
    They boomed a broadside over his grave,
      As meanin' to say 'Good-night.'

    "They sailed away in the dark
      To the dear little isle they knew;
    And they hung his drum by the old sea-wall
      The same as he told them to.

       *   *   *   *

    "Two hundred years went by,
      And the guns began to roar,
    And England was fighting hard for her life,
      As ever she fought of yore.

    "'It's only my dead that count,'
      She said, as she says to-day;
    'It isn't the ships and it isn't the guns
      'Ull sweep Trafalgar's Bay.'

    "D'you guess who Nelson was?
      You may laugh, but it's true as true!
    There was more in that pore little chawed-up chap
      Than ever his best friend knew.

    "The foe was creepin' close,
      In the dark, to our white-cliffed isle;
    They were ready to leap at England's throat,
      When--O, you may smile, you may smile;

    "But--ask of the Devonshire men;
      For they heard in the dead of night
    The roll of a drum, and they saw _him_ pass
      On a ship all shining white.

    "He stretched out his dead cold face
      And he sailed in the grand old way!
    The fishes had taken an eye and his arm,
      But he swept Trafalgar's Bay.

    "Nelson--was Francis Drake!
      O, what matters the uniform,
    Or the patch on your eye or your pinned-up sleeve,
      If your soul's like a North Sea storm?"




EDINBURGH


    I

    City of mist and rain and blown grey spaces,
      Dashed with wild wet colour and gleam of tears,
    Dreaming in Holyrood halls of the passionate faces
      Lifted to one Queen's face that has conquered the years,
    Are not the halls of thy memory haunted places?
      Cometh there not as a moon (where the blood-rust sears
    Floors a-flutter of old with silks and laces),
      Gliding, a ghostly Queen, thro' a mist of tears?


    II

    Proudly here, with a loftier pinnacled splendour,
      Throned in his northern Athens, what spells remain
    Still on the marble lips of the Wizard, and render
      Silent the gazer on glory without a stain!
    Here and here, do we whisper, with hearts more tender,
      Tusitala wandered thro' mist and rain;
    Rainbow-eyed and frail and gallant and slender,
      Dreaming of pirate-isles in a jewelled main.


    III

    Up the Canongate climbeth, cleft asunder
      Raggedly here, with a glimpse of the distant sea
    Flashed through a crumbling alley, a glimpse of wonder,
      Nay, for the City is throned on Eternity!
    Hark! from the soaring castle a cannon's thunder
      Closeth an hour for the world and an æon for me,
    Gazing at last from the martial heights whereunder
      Deathless memories roll to an ageless sea.




IN A RAILWAY CARRIAGE


    Three long isles of sunset-cloud,
      Poised in an ocean of gold,
    Floated away in the west
      As the long train southward rolled;

    And through the gleam and shade of the panes,
      While meadow and wood went by,
    Across the streaming earth
      We watched the steadfast sky.

    Dark before the westward window,
      Heavy and bloated, rolled
    The face of a drunken woman
      Nodding against the gold;

    Dark before the infinite glory,
      With bleared and leering eyes,
    It stupidly lurched and nodded
      Against the tender skies.

    _What had ye done to her, masters of men,
      That her head be bowed down thus--
    Thus for your golden vespers,
      And deepening angelus?_

    Dark, besotted, malignant, vacant,
      Slobbering, wrinkled, old,
    Weary and wickedly smiling,
      She nodded against the gold.

    Pitiful, loathsome, maudlin, lonely,
      Her moist, inhuman eyes
    Blinked at the flies on the window,
      And could not see the skies.

    As a beast that turns and returns to a mirror
      And will not see its face,
    Her eyes rejected the sunset,
      Her soul lay dead in its place,

    Dead in the furrows and folds of her flesh
      As a corpse lies lapped in the shroud;
    Silently floated beside her
      The isles of sunset-cloud.

    _What had ye done to her, years upon years,
      That her head should be bowed down thus--
    Thus for your golden vespers,
      And deepening angelus?_

    Her nails were blackened and split with labour,
      Her back was heavily bowed;
    Silently floated beside her
      The isles of sunset-cloud.

    Over their tapering streaks of lilac,
      In breathless depths afar,
    Bright as the tear of an angel
      Glittered a lonely star.

    While the hills and the streams of the world went past us,
      And the long train roared and rolled
    Southward, and dusk was falling,
      She nodded against the gold.




AN EAST-END COFFEE-STALL


    Down the dark alley a ring of orange light
      Glows. God, what leprous tatters of distress,
      Droppings of misery, rags of Thy loneliness
    Quiver and heave like vermin, out of the night!

    Like crippled rats, creeping out of the gloom,
      O Life, for one of thy terrible moments there,
      Lit by the little flickering yellow flare,
    Faces that mock at life and death and doom,

    Faces that long, long since have known the worst,
      Faces of women that have seen the child
      Waste in their arms, and strangely, terribly, smiled
    When the dark nipple of death has eased its thirst;

    Faces of men that once, though long ago,
      Saw the faint light of hope, though far away,--
      Hope that, at end of some tremendous day,
    They yet might reach some life where tears could flow;

    Faces of our humanity, ravaged, white,
      Wrenched with old love, old hate, older despair,
      Steal out of vile filth-dropping dens to stare
    On that wild monstrance of a naphtha light.

    They crowd before the stall's bright altar rail,
      Grotesque, and sacred, for that light's brief span,
      And all the shuddering darkness cries, "All hail,
    Daughters and Sons of Man!"

    See, see, once more, though all their souls be dead,
      They hold it up, triumphantly hold it up,
      They feel, they warm their hands upon the Cup;
    Their crapulous hands, their claw-like hands break Bread!

    See, with lean faces rapturously a-glow
      For a brief while they dream and munch and drink;
      Then, one by one, once more, silently slink
    Back, back into the gulfing mist. They go,

    One by one, out of the ring of light!
      They creep, like crippled rats, into the gloom,
      Into the fogs of life and death and doom,
    Into the night, the immeasurable night.




RED OF THE DAWN


    I

    The Dawn peered in with blood-shot eyes
      Pressed close against the cracked old pane.
      The garret slept: the slow sad rain
    Had ceased: grey fogs obscured the skies;
    But Dawn peered in with haggard eyes.


    II

    All as last night? The three-legged chair,
      The bare walls and the tattered bed,
      All!--but for those wild flakes of red
    (And Dawn, perhaps, had splashed them there!)
    Round the bare walls, the bed, the chair.


    III

    'Twas here, last night, when winds were loud,
      A ragged singing-girl, she came
      Out of the tavern's glare and shame,
    With some few pence--for she was proud--
    Came home to sleep, when winds were loud.


    IV

    And she sleeps well; for she was tired!
      That huddled shape beneath the sheet
      With knees up-drawn, no wind or sleet
    Can wake her now! Sleep she desired;
    And she sleeps well, for she was tired.


    V

    And there was one that followed her
      With some unhappy curse called "love":
      Last night, though winds beat loud above,
    She shrank! Hark, on the creaking stair,
    What stealthy footstep followed her?


    VI

    But now the Curse, it seemed, had gone!
      The small tin-box, wherein she hid
      Old childish treasures, had burst its lid.
    Dawn kissed her doll's cracked face. It shone
    Red-smeared, but laughing--_the Curse is gone_.


    VII

    So she sleeps well: she does not move;
      And on the wall, the chair, the bed,
      Is it the Dawn that splashes red,
    High as the text where _God is Love_
    Hangs o'er her head? She does not move.


    VIII

    The clock dictates its old refrain:
      All else is quiet; or, far away,
      Shaking the world with new-born day,
    There thunders past some mighty train:
    The clock dictates its old refrain.


    IX

    The Dawn peers in with blood-shot eyes:
      The crust, the broken cup are there!
      She does not rise yet to prepare
    Her scanty meal. God does not rise
      And pluck the blood-stained sheet from her;
    But Dawn peers in with haggard eyes.




THE DREAM-CHILD'S INVITATION


    I

    _Once upon a time!_--Ah, now the light is burning dimly.
      Peterkin is here again: he wants another tale!
    Don't you hear him whispering--_The wind is in the chimley,
      The ottoman's a treasure-ship, we'll all set sail?_


    II

    All set sail? No, the wind is very loud to-night:
      The darkness on the waters is much deeper than of yore.
    Yet I wonder--hark, he whispers--if the little streets are still as bright
      In old Japan, in old Japan, that happy haunted shore.


    III

    I wonder--hush, he whispers--if perhaps the world will wake again
      When Christmas brings the stories back from where the skies are blue,
    Where clouds are scattering diamonds down on every cottage window-pane,
      And every boy's a fairy prince, and every tale is true.


    IV

    There the sword Excalibur is thrust into the dragon's throat,
      Evil there is evil, black is black, and white is white:
    There the child triumphant hurls the villain spluttering into the moat;
      There the captured princess only waits the peerless knight.


    V

    Fairyland is gleaming there beyond the Sherwood Forest trees,
      There the City of the Clouds has anchored on the plain
    All her misty vistas and slumber-rosy palaces
      (_Shall we not, ah, shall we not, wander there again?_)


    VI

    "Happy ever after" there, the lights of home a welcome fling
      Softly thro' the darkness as the star that shone of old,
    Softly over Bethlehem and o'er the little cradled King
      Whom the sages worshipped with their frankincense and gold.


    VII

    _Once upon a time_--perhaps a hundred thousand years ago--
      Whisper to me, Peterkin, I have forgotten when!
    Once upon a time there was a way, a way we used to know
      For stealing off at twilight from the weary ways of men.


    VIII

    Whisper it, O whisper it--the way, the way is all I need!
      All the heart and will are here and all the deep desire!
    _Once upon a time_--ah, now the light is drawing near indeed,
      I see the fairy faces flush to roses round the fire.


    IX

    _Once upon a time_--the little lips are on my cheek again,
      Little fairy fingers clasped and clinging draw me nigh,
    Dreams, no more than dreams, but they unloose the weary prisoner's chain
      And lead him from his dungeon! "What's a thousand years?" they cry.


    X

    A thousand years, a thousand years, a little drifting dream ago,
      All of us were hunting with a band of merry men,
    The skies were blue, the boughs were green, the clouds were crisping
        isles of snow ...
      ... So Robin blew his bugle, and the Now became the Then.




THE TRAMP TRANSFIGURED

(AN EPISODE IN THE LIFE OF A CORN-FLOWER MILLIONAIRE)


    I

    All the way to Fairyland across the thyme and heather,
      Round a little bank of fern that rustled on the sky,
    Me and stick and bundle, sir, we jogged along together,--
      (Changeable the weather? Well--it ain't all pie!)
    Just about the sunset--Won't you listen to my story?--
      Look at me! I'm only rags and tatters to your eye!
    Sir, that blooming sunset crowned this battered hat with glory!
      Me that was a crawling worm became a butterfly--
                    (Ain't it hot and dry?
      Thank you, sir, thank you, sir!) a blooming butterfly.


    II

    Well, it happened this way! I was lying loose and lazy,
      Just as, of a Sunday, you yourself might think no shame,
    Puffing little clouds of smoke, and picking at a daisy,
      Dreaming of your dinner, p'raps, or wishful for the same:
    Suddenly, around that ferny bank there slowly waddled--
      Slowly as the finger of a clock her shadow came--
    Slowly as a tortoise down that winding path she toddled,
      Leaning on a crookèd staff, a poor old crookèd dame,
                    Limping, but not lame,
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, a poor old crookèd dame.


    III

    Slowly did I say, sir? Well, you've heard that funny fable
      Consekint the tortoise and the race it give an 'are?
    This was curiouser than that! At first I wasn't able
      Quite to size the memory up that bristled thro' my hair:
    Suddenly, I'd got it, with a nasty shivery feeling,
      While she walked and walked and yet was not a bit more near,--
    Sir, it was the tread-mill earth beneath her feet a-wheeling
      Faster than her feet could trot to heaven or anywhere,
                    Earth's revolvin' stair
      Wheeling, while my wayside clump was kind of anchored there.


    IV

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, and just a little nearer,
      Inch and 'arf an inch she went, but never gained a yard:
    Quiet as a fox I lay; I didn't wish to scare 'er,
      Watching thro' the ferns, and thinking "What a rum old card!"
    Both her wrinkled tortoise eyes with yellow resin oozing,
      Both her poor old bony hands were red and seamed and scarred!
    Lord, I felt as if myself was in a public boozing,
      While my own old woman went about and scrubbed and charred!
                    Lord, it seemed so hard!
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, she never gained a yard.


    V

    Yus, and there in front of her--I hadn't seen it rightly--
      Lurked that little finger-post to point another road,
    Just a tiny path of poppies twisting infi-nite-ly
      Through the whispering seas of wheat, a scarlet thread that showed
    White with ox-eye daisies here and there and chalky cobbles,
      Blue with waving corn-flowers: far and far away it glowed,
    Winding into heaven, I thinks; but, Lord, the way she hobbles,
      Lord, she'll never reach it, for she bears too great a load;
                    Yus, and then I knowed,
    If she did, she couldn't, for the board was marked _No Road_.


    VI

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, I couldn't wait no longer!
      Up I gets and bows polite and pleasant as a toff--
    "Arternoon," I says, "I'm glad your boots are going stronger;
      Only thing I'm dreading is your feet 'ull both come off."
    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, she didn't stop to answer,
      "Arternoon," she says, and sort o' chokes a little cough,
    "I must get to Piddinghoe to-morrow if I can, sir!"
      "Demme, my good woman! Haw! Don't think I mean to loff,"
                    Says I, like a toff,
      "Where d'you mean to sleep to-night? God made this grass for go'ff."


    VII

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, and smilingly she eyed me
      (Dreadful the low cunning of these creechars, don't you think?)
    "That's all right! The weather's bright. Them bushes there 'ull hide me.
      Don't the gorse smell nice?" I felt my derned old eyelids blink!
    "Supper? I've a crust of bread, a big one, and a bottle,"
      (Just as I expected! Ah, these creechars always drink!)
    "Sugar and water and half a pinch of tea to rinse my throttle,
      Then I'll curl up cosy!"--"If you're cotched it means the clink!"
                      --"Yus, but don't you think
      If a star should see me, God 'ull tell that star to wink?"


    VIII

    "Now, look here," I says, "I don't know what your blooming age is!"
      "Three-score years and five," she says, "that's five more years to go
    _Tick, tack, tick tack_, before I gets my wages!"
      "Wages all be damned," I says, "there's one thing that I know--
    Gals that stay out late o' nights are sure to meet wi' sorrow.
      Speaking as a toff," I says, "it isn't _comme il faut_!
    Tell me why you want to get to Piddinghoe to-morrow."--
      "That was where my son worked, twenty years ago!"--
                    "Twenty years ago?
      Never wrote? May still be there? Remember you?... Just so!"


    IX

    Yus, it was a drama; but she weren't my long-lost parent!
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, she trotted all the while,
    Never getting forrarder, and not the least aware on't,
      Though I stood beside her with a sort of silly smile
    Stock-still! _Tick, tack_! This blooming world's a bubble:
      There I stood and stared at it, mile on flowery mile,
    Chasing o' the sunset,--"Gals are sure to meet wi' trouble
      Staying out o' nights," I says, once more, and tries to smile,
                      "Come, that ain't your style,
      Here's a shilling, mother, for to-day I've made my pile!"


    X

    Yus, a dozen coppers, all my capital, it fled, sir,
      Representin' twelve bokays that cost me nothink each,
    Twelve bokays o' corn-flowers blue that grew beside my bed, sir,
      That same day, at sunrise, when the sky was like a peach:
    Easy as a poet's dreams they blossomed round my head, sir,
      All I had to do was just to lift my hand and reach:
    So, upon the roaring waves I cast my blooming bread, sir,
      Bread I'd earned with nose-gays on the bare-foot Brighton beach,
                    Nose-gays _and_ a speech,
      All about the bright blue eyes they matched on Brighton beach.


    XI

    Still, you've only got to hear the bankers on the budget,
      Then you'll know the giving game is hardly "high finance";
    Which no more it wasn't for that poor old dame to trudge it,
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, on such a devil's dance:
    Crumbs, it took me quite aback to see her stop so humble,
      Casting up into my face a sort of shiny glance,
    _Bless you, bless you_, that was what I thought I heard her mumble;
      Lord, a prayer for poor old Bill, a rummy sort of chance!
                      Crumbs, that shiny glance
      Kinder made me king of all the sky from here to France.


    XII

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, but now she toddled faster:
      Soon she'd reach the little twisted by-way through the wheat.
    "Look 'ee here," I says, "young woman, don't you court disaster!
      Peepin' through yon poppies there's a cottage trim and neat
    White as chalk and sweet as turf: wot price a bed for sorrow,
      Sprigs of lavender between the pillow and the sheet?"
    "No," she says, "I've got to get to Piddinghoe to-morrow!
      P'raps they'd tell the work'us! And I've lashings here to eat:
                      Don't the gorse smell sweet?"...
      Well, I turned and left her plodding on beside the wheat.


    XIII

    Every cent I'd given her like a hero in a story;
      Yet, alone with leagues of wheat I seemed to grow aware
    Solomon himself, arrayed in all his golden glory,
      Couldn't vie with Me, the corn-flower king, the millionaire!
    How to cash those bright blue cheques that night? My trouser pockets
      Jingled sudden! Six more pennies, crept from James knew where!
    Crumbs! I hurried back with eyes just bulging from their sockets,
      Pushed 'em in the old dame's fist and listened for the prayer,
                      Shamming not to care,
      Bill--the blarsted chicken-thief, the corn-flower millionaire.


    XIV

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, and faster yet she clattered!
      Ay, she'd almost gained a yard! I left her once again.
    Feeling very warm inside and sort of 'ighly flattered,
      On I plodded, all alone, with hay-stacks in my brain.
    Suddenly, with _chink--chink--chink_, the old sweet jingle
      Startled me! 'TWAS THRUPPENCE MORE! Three coppers round and plain!
    Lord, temptation struck me and I felt my gullet tingle.
      Then--I hurried back, beside them seas of golden grain:
                  No, I can't explain;
      There I thrust 'em in her fist, and left her once again.


    XV

    Tinkle-chink! THREE HA'PENCE! If the vulgar fractions followed,
      Big fleas have little fleas! It flashed upon me there,--
    Like the snakes of Pharaoh which the snakes of Moses swallowed
      All the world was playing at the tortoise and the hare:
    Half the smallest atom is--my soul was getting tipsy--
      Heaven is one big circle and the centre's everywhere,
    Yus, and that old woman was an angel and a gipsy,
      Yus, and Bill, the chicken-thief, the corn-flower millionaire,
                    Shamming not to care,
      What was he? A seraph on the misty rainbow-stair!


    XVI

    Don't you make no doubt of it! The deeper that you look, sir,
      All your ancient poets tell you just the same as me,--
    What about old Ovid and his most indecent book, sir,
      Morphosizing females into flower and star and tree?
    What about old Proteus and his 'ighly curious 'abits,
      Mixing of his old grey beard into the old grey sea?
    What about old Darwin and the hat that brought forth rabbits,
      Mud and slime that growed into the pomp of Ninevey?
                  What if there should be
      One great Power beneath it all, one God in you and me?


    XVII

    Anyway, it seemed to me I'd struck the world's pump-handle!
      "Back with that three ha'pence, Bill," I mutters, "or you're lost."
    Back I hurries thro' the dusk where, shining like a candle,
      Pale before the sunset stood that fairy finger-post.
      _Sir, she wasn't there!_ I'd struck the place where all roads crost,
    All the roads in all the world.
                                She couldn't yet have trotted
      Even to the ... Hist! a stealthy step behind? A ghost?
    _Swish_! A flying noose had caught me round the neck! Garotted!
      Back I staggered, clutching at the moonbeams, yus, almost
                    Throttled! Sir, I boast
      Bill is tough, but ... when it comes to throttling by a ghost!

       *   *   *   *


    XVIII

    Winged like a butterfly, tall and slender
        Out It steps with the rope on its arm.
    "Crumbs," I says, "all right! I surrender!
      When have I crossed you or done you harm?
    _Ef_ you're a sperrit," I says, "O, crikey,
      _Ef_ you're a sperrit, get hence, vamoose!"
    Sweet as music, she spoke--"I'm Psyche!"--
      Choking me still with her silken noose.


    XIX

    Straight at the word from the ferns and blossoms
      Fretting the moon-rise over the downs,
    Little blue wings and little white bosoms,
      Little white faces with golden crowns
    Peeped, and the colours came twinkling round me,
      Laughed, and the turf grew purple with thyme,
    Danced, and the sweet crushed scents nigh drowned me,
      Sang, and the hare-bells rang in chime.


    XX

    All around me, gliding and gleaming,
      Fair as a fallen sunset-sky,
    Butterfly wings came drifting, dreaming,
      Clouds of the little folk clustered nigh,
    Little white hands like pearls uplifted
      Cords of silk in shimmering skeins,
    Cast them about me and dreamily drifted
      Winding me round with their soft warm chains.


    XXI

    Round and round me they dizzily floated,
      Binding me faster with every turn:
    Crumbs, my pals would have grinned and gloated
      Watching me over that fringe of fern,
    Bill, with his battered old hat outstanding
      Black as a foam-swept rock to the moon,
    Bill, like a rainbow of silks expanding
      Into a beautiful big cocoon,--


    XXII

    Big as a cloud, though his hat still crowned him,
      Yus, and his old boots bulged below:
    Seas of colour went shimmering round him,
      Dancing, glimmering, glancing a-glow!
    Bill knew well what them elves were at, sir,--
      Ain't you an en-to-mol-o-gist?
    Well, despite of his old black hat, sir,
     Bill was _becoming--a chrysalist_.

       *   *   *   *


    XXIII

    Muffled, smothered in a sea of emerald and opal,
      Down a dazzling gulf of dreams I sank and sank away,
    Wound about with twenty thousand yards of silken rope, all
      Shimmering into crimson, glimmering into grey,
    Drowsing, waking, living, dying, just as you regards it,
      Buried in a sunset-cloud, or cloud of breaking day,
    'Cording as from East or West yourself might look towards it,
      Losing, gaining, lost in darkness, ragged, grimy, gay,
                    'And-cuffed, not to say
      Gagged, but both my shoulders budding, sprouting white as May.


    XXIV

    Sprouting like the milky buds o' hawthorn in the night-time,
      Pouting like the snowy buds o' roses in July,
    Spreading in my chrysalist and waiting for the right time,
      When--I thought--they'd bust to wings and Bill would rise and fly,
    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, as if it came in answer,
      Sweeping o'er my head again the tide o' dreams went by,--
    _I must get to Piddinghoe to-morrow if I can, sir,_
      _Tick, tack_, a crackle in my chrysalist, a cry!
        Then the warm blue sky
    Bust the shell, and out crept Bill--a blooming butterfly!

       *   *   *   *


    XXV

    Blue as a corn-flower, blazed the zenith: the deepening East like a
        scarlet poppy
      Burned while, dazzled with golden bloom, white clouds like daisies,
          green seas like wheat,
    Gripping the sign-post, first, I climbs, to sun my wings, which were
        wrinkled and floppy,
      Spreading 'em white o'er the words _No Road_, and hanging fast by
          my six black feet.


    XXVI

    Still on my head was the battered old beaver, but through it my clubbed
        antennæ slanted,
      ("Feelers" yourself would probably call 'em) my battered old boots were
           hardly seen
    Under the golden fluff of the tail! It was Bill, sir, Bill, though
        highly enchanted,
      Spreading his beautiful snow-white pinions, tipped with orange, and
          veined with green.


    XXVII

    Yus, old Bill was an Orange-tip, a spirit in glory, a blooming Psyche!
      New, it was new from East to West this rummy old world that I dreamed
          I knew,
    How can I tell you the things that I saw with my--what shall _I_ call 'em?
         --"feelers?"--O, crikey,
      "FEELERS?" You know how the man born blind described such colours as
          scarlet or blue.


    XXVIII

    "Scarlet," he says, "is the sound of a trumpet, blue is a flute,"
        for he hasn't a notion!
      No, nor nobody living on earth can tell it him plain, if he
          hasn't the sight!
    That's how it stands with ragged old Bill, a-drift and a-dream on
        a measureless ocean,
      Gifted wi' fifteen new-born senses, and seeing you blind to their
          new strange light.


    XXIX

    How can I tell you? Sir, you must wait, till you die like Bill, ere
        you understand it!
      Only--I saw--the same as a bee that strikes to his hive ten leagues away--
    Straight as a die, while I winked and blinked on that sun-warmed wood and my
        wings expanded
      (Whistler drawings that men call wings)--I saw--and I flew--that's all
          I can say.


    XXX

    Flew over leagues of whispering wonder, fairy forests and flowery palaces,
      Love-lorn casements, delicate kingdoms, beautiful flaming thoughts
          of--Him;
    Feasts of a million blue-mailed angels lifting their honey-and-wine-brimmed
        chalices,
      Throned upon clouds--(which you'd call white clover) down to the
          world's most rosiest rim.


    XXXI

    New and new and new and new, the white o' the cliffs and the wind
        in the heather,
      Yus, and the sea-gulls flying like flakes of the sea that flashed
          to the new-born day,
    Song, song, song, song, quivering up in the wild blue weather,
      Thousands of seraphim singing together, and me just flying
          and--_knowing my way_.


    XXXII

    Straight as a die to Piddinghoe's dolphin, and there I drops in a
        cottage garden,
      There, on a sun-warmed window-sill, I winks and peeps, for the
          window was wide!
    Crumbs, he was there and fast in her arms and a-begging his poor
        old mother's pardon,
      There with his lips on her old grey hair, and her head on his breast
          while she laughed and cried,--


    XXXIII

    "_One and nine-pence that old tramp gave me, or else I should never have
        reached you, sonny,
      Never, and you just leaving the village to-day and meaning to
          cross the sea,
    One and nine-pence he gave me, I paid for the farmer's lift with
        half o' the money!
      Here's the ten-pence halfpenny, sonny, 'twill pay for our little
          'ouse-warming tea._"

       *   *   *   *


    XXXIV

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, out into the garden
      Toddles that old Fairy with his arm about her--so,
    Cuddling of her still, and still a-begging of her pardon,
      While she says "I wish the corn-flower king could only know!
    Bless him, bless him, once again," she says and softly gazes
      Up to heaven, a-smiling in her mutch as white as snow,
    All among her gilly-flowers and stocks and double daisies,
      Mignonette, forget-me-not,... _Twenty years ago_,
                  All a rosy glow,
      _This is how it was_, she said, _Twenty years ago_.

       *   *   *   *


    XXXV

    Once again I seemed to wake, the vision it had fled, sir,
      There I lay upon the downs: the sky was like a peach;
    Yus, with twelve bokays of corn-flowers blue beside my bed, sir,
      More than usual 'andsome, so they'd bring me two-pence each.
    Easy as a poet's dreams they blossomed round my head, sir,
      All I had to do was just to lift my hand and reach,
    Tie 'em with a bit of string, and earn my blooming bread, sir,
      Selling little nose-gays on the bare-foot Brighton beach,
                      Nose-gays _and_ a speech,
      All about the bright blue eyes they matched on Brighton beach.


    XXXVI

    Overhead the singing lark and underfoot the heather,
      Far and blue in front of us the unplumbed sky,
    Me and stick and bundle, O, we jogs along together,
      (Changeable the weather? Well, it ain't all pie!)
    Weather's like a woman, sir, and if she wants to quarrel,
      If her eyes begin to flash and hair begins to fly,
    You've to wait a little, then--the story has a moral--
      Ain't the sunny kisses all the sweeter by and bye?--
                    (Crumbs, it's 'ot and dry!
      Thank you, sir! Thank you, sir!) the sweeter by and bye.


    XXXVII

    So the world's my sweetheart and I sort of want to squeeze 'er.
      Toffs 'ull get no chance of heaven, take 'em in the lump!
    Never laid in hay-fields when the dawn came over-sea, sir?
      Guess it's true that story 'bout the needle and the hump!
    Never crept into a stack because the wind was blowing,
      Hollered out a nest and closed the door-way with a clump,
    Laid and heard the whisper of the silence, growing, growing,
      Watched a thousand wheeling stars and wondered if they'd bump?
                    What I say would stump
      Joshua! But I've done it, sir. Don't think I'm off my chump.


    XXXVIII

    If you try and lay, sir, with your face turned up to wonder,
      Up to twenty million miles of stars that roll like one,
    Right across to God knows where, and you just huddled under
      Like a little beetle with no business of his own,
    There you'd hear--like growing grass--a funny silent sound, sir,
      Mixed with curious crackles in a steady undertone,
    Just the sound of twenty billion stars a-going round, sir,
      Yus, and you beneath 'em like a wise old ant, alone,
                    Ant upon a stone,
      Waving of his antlers, on the Sussex downs, alone.




ON THE DOWNS


    Wide-eyed our childhood roamed the world
      Knee-deep in blowing grass,
    And watched the white clouds crisply curled
      Above the mountain-pass,
    And lay among the purple thyme
      And from its fragrance caught
    Strange hints from some elusive clime
      Beyond the bounds of thought.

    Glimpses of fair forgotten things
      Beyond the gates of birth,
    Half-caught from far off ancient springs
      In heaven, and half of earth;
    And coloured like a fairy-tale
      And whispering evermore
    Half memories from the half-fenced pale
      Of lives we lived before.

    Here, weary of the roaring town
      A-while may I return
    And while the west wind roams the down
      Lie still, lie still and learn:
    Here are green leagues of murmuring wheat
      With blue skies overhead,
    And, all around, the winds are sweet
      With May-bloom, white and red.

    And, to and fro, the bee still hums
      His low unchanging song,
    And the same rustling whisper comes
      As through the ages long:
    Through all the thousands of the years
      That same sweet rumour flows,
    With dreaming skies and gleaming tears
      And kisses and the rose.

    Once more the children throng the lanes,
      Themselves like flowers, to weave
    Their garlands and their daisy-chains
      And listen and believe
    The tale of _Once-upon-a-time_,
      And hear the _Long-ago_
    And _Happy-ever-after_ chime
      Because it must be so.

    And by those thousands of the years
      It is, though scarce we see,
    Dazed with the rainbows of our tears,
      Their steadfast unity,
    It is, or life's disjointed schemes,
      These stones, these ferns unfurled
    With such deep care--a madman's dreams
      Were wisdom to this world!

    Dust into dust! Lie still and learn,
      Hear how the ages sing
    The solemn joy of our return
      To that which makes the Spring:
    Even as we came, with childhood's trust,
      Wide-eyed we go, to Thee
    Who holdest In Thy sacred dust
      The heavenly Springs to be.




A MAY-DAY CAROL


    What is the loveliest light that Spring
      Rosily parting her robe of grey
    Girdled with leaflet green, can fling
      Over the fields where her white feet stray?
    What is the merriest promise of May
      Flung o'er the dew-drenched April flowers?
    Tell me, you on the pear-tree spray--
      _Carol of birds between the showers_.

    What can life at its lightest bring
      Better than this on its brightest day?
    How should we fetter the white-throat's wing
      Wild with joy of its woodland way?
    Sweet, should love for an hour delay,
      Swift, while the primrose-time is ours!
    What is the lover's royallest lay?--
      _Carol of birds between the showers_.

    What is the murmur of bees a-swing?
      What is the laugh of a child at play?
    What is the song that the angels sing?
      (Where were the tune could the sweet notes stay
    Longer than this, to kiss and betray?)
      Nay, on the blue sky's topmost towers,
    What is the song of the seraphim? Say--
      _Carol of birds between the showers._

    Thread the stars on a silver string,
      (So did they sing in Bethlehem's bowers!)
    Mirth for a little one, grief for a king,
      _Carol of birds between the showers_.




THE CALL OF THE SPRING


    Come, choose your road and away, my lad,
      Come, choose your road and away!
    We'll out of the town by the road's bright crown
      As it dips to the dazzling day.
    It's a long white road for the weary;
      But it rolls through the heart of the May.

    Though many a road would merrily ring
      To the tramp of your marching feet,
    All roads are one from the day that's done,
      And the miles are swift and sweet,
    And the graves of your friends are the mile-stones
      To the land where all roads meet.

    But the call that you hear this day, my lad,
      Is the Spring's old bugle of mirth
    When the year's green fire in a soul's desire
      Is brought like a rose to the birth;
    And knights ride out to adventure
      As the flowers break out of the earth.

    Over the sweet-smelling mountain-passes
      The clouds lie brightly curled;
    The wild-flowers cling to the crags and swing
      With cataract-dews impearled;
    And the way, the way that you choose this day
      Is the way to the end of the world.

    It rolls from the golden long ago
      To the land that we ne'er shall find;
    And it's uphill here, but it's downhill there,
      For the road is wise and kind,
    And all rough places and cheerless faces
      Will soon be left behind.

    Come, choose your road and away, away,
      We'll follow the gipsy sun,
    For it's soon, too soon to the end of the day,
      And the day is well begun;
    And the road rolls on through the heart of the May,
      And there's never a May but one.

    There's a fir-wood here, and a dog-rose there,
      And a note of the mating dove;
    And a glimpse, maybe, of the warm blue sea,
      And the warm white clouds above;
    And warm to your breast in a tenderer nest
      Your sweetheart's little glove.

    There's not much better to win, my lad,
      There's not much better to win!
    You have lived, you have loved, you have fought, you have proved
      The worth of folly and sin;
    So now come out of the City's rout,
      Come out of the dust and the din.

    Come out,--a bundle and stick is all
      You'll need to carry along,
    If your heart can carry a kindly word,
      And your lips can carry a song;
    You may leave the lave to the keep o' the grave,
      If your lips can carry a song!

    _Come, choose your road and away, my lad,
      Come, choose your road and away!
    We'll out of the town by the road's bright crown,
      As it dips to the sapphire day!
    All roads may meet at the world's end,
      But, hey for the heart of the May!
    Come, choose your road and away, dear lad,
      Come choose your road and away._




A DEVONSHIRE DITTY


    I

    In a leafy lane of Devon
      There's a cottage that I know,
        Then a garden--then, a grey old crumbling wall,
    And the wall's the wall of heaven
      (Where I hardly care to go)
        And there isn't any fiery sword at all.


    II

    But I never went to heaven.
      There was right good reason why,
        For they sent a shining angel to me there,
    An angel, down in Devon,
      (Clad in muslin by the bye)
        With the halo of the sunshine on her hair.


    III

    Ah, whate'er the darkness covers,
      And whate'er we sing or say,
        Would you climb the wall of heaven an hour too soon
    If you knew a place for lovers
      Where the apple-blossoms stray
        Out of heaven to sway and whisper to the moon?


    IV

    When we die--we'll think of Devon
      Where the garden's all aglow
        With the flowers that stray across the grey old wall:
    Then we'll climb it, out of heaven,
      From the other side, you know,
    Straggle over it from heaven
      With the apple-blossom snow,
    Tumble back again to Devon
      Laugh and love as long ago,
    Where there isn't any fiery sword at all.




BACCHUS AND THE PIRATES


    Half a hundred terrible pig-tails, pirates famous in song and story,
      Hoisting the old black flag once more, in a palmy harbour of Caribbee,
    "Farewell" we waved to our brown-skinned lasses, and chorussing out to
        the billows of glory,
      Billows a-glitter with rum and gold, we followed the sunset over the sea.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred broad-sheet pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Sea-roads plated with pieces of eight that rolled to a heaven by rum
        made mellow,
      Heaved and coloured our barque's black nose where the Lascar sang
          to a twinkling star,
    And the tangled bow-sprit plunged and dipped its point in the west's
        wild red and yellow,
      Till the curved white moon crept out astern like a naked knife
          from a blue cymar.

          _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
            Our capstan song we sung:
          Half a hundred terrible pirates
            When the world was young!_

    Half a hundred tarry pig-tails, Teach, the chewer of glass, had taught us,
      Taught us to balance the plank ye walk, your little plank-bridge
          to Kingdom Come:
    Half a score had sailed with Flint, and a dozen or so the devil
        had brought us
      Back from the pit where Blackbeard lay, in Beelzebub's bosom,
          a-screech for rum.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred piping pirates
          When the world was young!_

    There was Captain Hook (of whom ye have heard--so called from his terrible
        cold steel twister,
      His own right hand having gone to a shark with a taste for skippers
          on pirate-trips),
    There was Silver himself, with his cruel crutch, and the blind man Pew,
         with a phiz like a blister,
      Gouged and white and dreadfully dried in the reek of a thousand
          burning ships.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred cut-throat pirates
          When the world was young!_

    With our silver buckles and French cocked hats and our skirted coats
        (they were growing greener,
      But green and gold look well when spliced! We'd trimmed 'em up
          wi' some fine fresh lace)
    Bravely over the seas we danced to the horn-pipe tune of a concertina,
      Cutlasses jetting beneath our skirts and cambric handkerchiefs
          all in place.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred elegant pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And our black prow grated, one golden noon, on the happiest isle of
        the Happy Islands,
      An isle of Paradise, fair as a gem, on the sparkling breast of the
          wine-dark deep,
    An isle of blossom and yellow sand, and enchanted vines on the purple
        highlands,
      Wi' grapes like melons, nay clustering suns, a-sprawl over cliffs in
          their noonday sleep.

        _While earth goes round let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred dream-struck pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And lo! on the soft warm edge of the sand, where the sea like wine
        in a golden noggin
      Creamed, and the rainbow-bubbles clung to his flame-red hair,
          a white youth lay,
    Sleeping; and now, as his drowsy grip relaxed, the cup that he
        squeezed his grog in
      Slipped from his hand and its purple dregs were mixed with the flames
          and flakes of spray.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred diffident pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And we suddenly saw (had we seen them before? They were coloured like
        sand or the pelt on his shoulders)
      His head was pillowed on two great leopards, whose breathing rose
          and sank with his own;
    Now a pirate is bold, but the vision was rum and would _call_ for rum
        in the best of beholders,
      And it seemed we had seen Him before, in a dream, with that flame-red
          hair and that vine-leaf crown.

        _And the earth went round, and the rum went round,
          And softlier now we sung:
        Half a hundred awe-struck pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Now Timothy Hook (of whom ye have heard, with his talon of steel)
        our doughty skipper,
      A man that, in youth being brought up pious, had many a book on
        his cabin-shelf,
    Suddenly caught at a comrade's hand with the tearing claws of his
        cold steel flipper
      And cried, "Great Thunder and Brimstone, boys, I've hit it at last!
        _'Tis Bacchus himself._"

        _And the earth went round, and the rum went round,
          And never a word we sung:
        Half a hundred tottering pirates
          When the world was young!_

    He flung his French cocked hat i' the foam (though its lace was the best
        of his wearing apparel):
      We stared at him--Bacchus! The sea reeled round like a wine-vat
          splashing with purple dreams,
    And the sunset-skies were dashed with blood of the grape as the sun
        like a new-staved barrel
      Flooded the tumbling West with wine and spattered the clouds with
          crimson gleams.

        _And the earth went round, and our heads went round,
          And never a word we sung:
        Half a hundred staggering pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Down to the ship for a fishing-net our crafty Hook sent Silver leaping;
      Back he came on his pounding crutch, for all the world like a kangaroo;
    And we caught the net and up to the Sleeper on hands and knees we all
        went creeping,
      Flung it across him and staked it down! 'Twas the best of our dreams
          and the dream was true.

        _And the earth went round, and the rum went round,
          And loudly now we sung:
        Half a hundred jubilant pirates
          When the world was young!_

    We had caught our god, and we got him aboard ere he woke (he was more
        than a little heavy);
      Glittering, beautiful, flushed he lay in the lurching bows of
          the old black barque,
    As the sunset died and the white moon dawned, and we saw on the island
        a star-bright bevy
      Of naked Bacchanals stealing to watch through the whispering vines in
          the purple dark!

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred innocent pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Beautiful under the sailing moon, in the tangled net, with the leopards
        beside him,
      Snared like a wild young red-lipped merman, wilful, petulant,
          flushed he lay;
    While Silver and Hook in their big sea-boots and their boat-cloaks
        guarded and gleefully eyed him,
      Thinking what Bacchus might do for a seaman, like standing him drinks,
          as a man might say.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          We sailed away and sung:
        Half a hundred fanciful pirates
          When the world was young!_

    All the grog that ever was heard of, gods, was it stowed in our
        sure possession?
      O, the pictures that broached the skies and poured their colours
          across our dreams!
    O, the thoughts that tapped the sunset, and rolled like a great
        torchlight procession
      Down our throats in a glory of glories, a roaring splendour
          of golden streams!

        _And the earth went round, and the stars went round,
          As we hauled the sheets and sung:
        Half a hundred infinite pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Beautiful, white, at the break of day, He woke and, the net in a
        smoke dissolving,
      He rose like a flame, with his yellow-eyed pards and his
          flame-red hair like a windy dawn,
    And the crew kept back, respectful like, till the leopards advanced
        with their eyes revolving,
      Then up the rigging went Silver and Hook, and the rest of us followed
          with case-knives drawn.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our cross-tree song we sung:
        Half a hundred terrified pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And "Take me home to my happy island!" he says. "Not I," sings Hook,
        "by thunder;
      We'll take you home to a happier isle, our palmy harbour of Caribbee!"
    "You won't!" says Bacchus, and quick as a dream the planks of the deck just
        heaved asunder,
      And a mighty Vine came straggling up that grew from the depths of
          the wine-dark sea.

        _And the sea went round, and the skies went round,
          As our cross-tree song we sung:
        Half a hundred horrified pirates
          When the world was young!_

    We were anchored fast as an oak on land, and the branches clutched and
        the tendrils quickened,
      And bound us writhing like snakes to the spars! Ay, we hacked with our
          knives at the boughs in vain,
    And Bacchus laughed loud on the decks below, as ever the tough sprays
        tightened and thickened,
      And the blazing hours went by, and we gaped with thirst and our ribs
          were racked with pain

        _And the skies went round, and the sea swam round,
          And we knew not what we sung:
        Half a hundred lunatic pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Bunch upon bunch of sunlike grapes, as we writhed and struggled and raved
        and strangled,
      Bunch upon bunch of gold and purple daubed its bloom on our baked
          black lips.
    Clustering grapes, O, bigger than pumpkins, just out of reach they
         bobbed and dangled
      Over the vine-entangled sails of that most dumbfounded of pirate ships!

        _And the sun went round, and the moon came round,
          And mocked us where we hung:
        Half a hundred maniac pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Over the waters the white moon winked its bruised old eye at our
        bowery prison,
      When suddenly we were aware of a light such as never a moon
          or a ship's lamp throws,
    And a shallop of pearl, like a Nautilus shell, came shimmering up
        as by magic arisen,
      With sails: of silk and a glory around it that turned the sea
          to a rippling rose.

        _And our heads went round, and the stars went round,
          At the song that cruiser sung:
        Half a hundred goggle-eyed pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Half a hundred rose-white Bacchanals hauled the ropes of that rosy cruiser!
      Over the seas they came and laid their little white hands on the old
          black barque;
    And Bacchus he ups and he steps aboard: "Hi, stop!" cries Hook,
        "you frantic old boozer!
      Belay, below there, don't you go and leave poor pirates to
          die in the dark!"

        _And the moon went round, and the stars went round,
          As they all pushed off and sung:
        Half a hundred ribbonless Bacchanals
          When the world was young!_

    Over the seas they went and Bacchus he stands, with his yellow-eyed
        leopards beside him,
      High on the poop of rose and pearl, and kisses his hand to us,
          pleasant as pie!
    While the Bacchanals danced to their tambourines, and the vine-leaves
        flew, and Hook just eyed him
      Once, as a man that was brought up pious, and scornfully hollers,
          "_Well, you ain't shy!_"

            _For all around him, vine-leaf crowned,
              The wild white Bacchanals flung!
            Nor it wasn't a sight for respectable pirates
              When the world was young!_

    All around that rainbow-Nautilus rippled the bloom of a thousand roses,
      Nay, but the sparkle of fairy sea-nymphs breasting a fairy-like
          sea of wine,
    Swimming around it in murmuring thousands, with white arms tossing;
        till--all that _we_ knows is
      The light went out, and the night was dark, and the grapes had
          burst and their juice was--brine!

            _And the vines that bound our bodies round
              Were plain wet ropes that clung,
            Squeezing the light out o' fifty pirates
              When the world was young!_

    Over the seas in the pomp of dawn a king's ship came with her proud
        flag flying.
      Cloud upon cloud we watched her tower with her belts and her crowded
         zones of sail;
    And an A.B. perched in a white crow's nest, with a brass-rimmed
        spy-glass quietly spying,
      As we swallowed the lumps in our choking throats and uttered
          our last faint feeble hail!

            _And our heads went round as the ship went round,
              And we thought how coves had swung:
            All for playing at broad-sheet pirates
              When the world was young!_

    Half a hundred trembling corsairs, all cut loose, but a trifle giddy,
      We lands on their trim white decks at last and the bo'sun he whistles us
          good hot grog,
    And we tries to confess, but there wasn't a soul from the Admiral's
        self to the gold-laced middy
      But says, "They're delirious still, poor chaps," and the Cap'n he
          enters the fact in his log,

            _That his boat's crew found us nearly drowned
              In a barrel without a bung--
            Half a hundred suffering sea-cooks
              When the world was young!_

    So we sailed by Execution Dock, where the swinging pirates haughty
         and scornful
      Rattled their chains, and on Margate beach we came like a school-treat
          safe to land;
    And one of us took to religion at once; and the rest of the crew, tho'
        their hearts were mournful,
      Capered about as Christy Minstrels, while Hook conducted the big
          brass band.

            _And the sun went round, and the moon went round,
              And, O, 'twas a thought that stung!
            There was none to believe we were broad-sheet pirates
              When the world was young!_

    Ah, yet (if ye stand me a noggin of rum) shall the old Blue Dolphin echo
        the story!
      We'll hoist the white cross-bones again in our palmy harbour of Caribbee!
    We'll wave farewell to our brown-skinned lasses and, chorussing out to the
        billows of glory,
      Billows a-glitter with rum and gold, we'll follow the sunset over the sea!

            _While earth goes round, let rum go round!
              O, sing it as we sung!
            Half a hundred terrible pirates
              When the world was young!_




THE NEWSPAPER BOY


    I

    Elf of the City, a lean little hollow-eyed boy
      Ragged and tattered, but lithe as a slip of the Spring,
    Under the lamp-light he runs with a reckless joy
     Shouting a murderer's doom or the death of a King.

    Out of the darkness he leaps like a wild strange hint,
      Herald of tragedy, comedy, crime and despair,
    Waving a poster that hurls you, in fierce black print
      One word _Mystery_, under the lamp's white glare.


    II

    Elf of the night of the City he darts with his crew
      Out of a vaporous furnace of colour that wreathes
    Magical letters a-flicker from crimson to blue
      High overhead. All round him the mad world seethes.
    Hansoms, like cantering beetles, with diamond eyes
      Run through the moons of it; busses in yellow and red
    Hoot; and St. Paul's is a bubble afloat in the skies,
      Watching the pale moths flit and the dark death's head.


    III

    Painted and powdered they shimmer and rustle and stream
      Westward, the night moths, masks of the Magdalen! See,
    Puck of the revels, he leaps through the sinister dream
      Waving his elfin evangel of _Mystery_,
    Puck of the bubble or dome of their scoffing or trust,
      Puck of the fairy-like tower with the clock in its face,
    Puck of an Empire that whirls on a pellet of dust
      Bearing his elfin device thro' the splendours of space.


    IV

    _Mystery_--is it the scribble of doom on the dark,
      Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin, again?
    _Mystery_--is it a scrap of remembrance, a spark
      Burning still in the fog of a blind world's brain?
    Elf of the gossamer tangles of shadow and light,
      Wild electrical webs and the battle that rolls
    League upon perishing league thro' the ravenous night,
      Breaker on perishing breaker of human souls.


    V

    Soaked in the colours, a flake of the flying spray
      Flung over wreckage and yeast of the murderous town,
    Onward he flaunts it, innocent, vicious and gay,
      Prophet of prayers that are stifled and loves that drown,
    Urchin and sprat of the City that roars like a sea
      Surging around him in hunger and splendour and shame,
    Cruelty, luxury, madness, he leaps in his glee
      Out of the mazes of mist and the vistas of flame.


    VI

    Ragged and tattered he scurries away in the gloom:
      Over the thundering traffic a moment his cry
    Mystery! Mystery!--reckless of death and doom
      Rings; and the great wheels roll and the world goes by.
    Lost, is it lost, that hollow-eyed flash of the light?--
      Poor little face flying by with the word that saves,
    Pale little mouth of the mask of the measureless night,
      Shrilling the heart of it, lost like the foam on its waves!




THE TWO WORLDS


    This outer world is but the pictured scroll
      Of worlds within the soul,
    A coloured chart, a blazoned missal-book
      Whereon who rightly look
    May spell the splendours with their mortal eyes
      And steer to Paradise.

    O, well for him that knows and early knows
      In his own soul the rose
    Secretly burgeons, of this earthly flower
      The heavenly paramour:
    And all these fairy dreams of green-wood fern,
      These waves that break and yearn,
    Shadows and hieroglyphs, hills, clouds and seas,
      Faces and flowers and trees,
    Terrestrial picture-parables, relate
      Each to its heavenly mate.

    O, well for him that finds in sky and sea
            This two-fold mystery,
    And loses not (as painfully he spells
            The fine-spun syllables)
    The cadences, the burning inner gleam,
            The poet's heavenly dream.

    Well for the poet if this earthly chart
            Be printed in his heart,
    When to his world of spirit woods and seas
            With eager face he flees
    And treads the untrodden fields of unknown flowers
            And threads the angelic bowers,
    And hears that unheard nightingale whose moan
            Trembles within his own,
    And lovers murmuring in the leafy lanes
            Of his own joys and pains.

    For though he voyages further than the flight
            Of earthly day and night,
    Traversing to the sky's remotest ends
            A world that he transcends,
    Safe, he shall hear the hidden breakers roar
            Against the mystic shore;
    Shall roam the yellow sands where sirens bare
            Their breasts and wind their hair;
    Shall with their perfumed tresses blind his eyes,
            And still possess the skies.

    He, where the deep unearthly jungles are,
            Beneath his Eastern star
    Shall pass the tawny lion in his den
            And cross the quaking fen.
    He learnt his path (and treads it undefiled)
            When, as a little child,
    He bent his head with long and loving looks
            O'er earthly picture-books.
    His earthly love nestles against his side,
            His young celestial guide.




GORSE


    Between my face and the warm blue sky
    The crisp white clouds go sailing by,
      And the only sound is the sound of your breathing,
    The song of a bird and the sea's long sigh.

    Here, on the downs, as a tale re-told
    The sprays of the gorse are a-blaze with gold,
      As of old, on the sea-washed hills of my boyhood,
    Breathing the same sweet scent as of old.

    Under a ragged golden spray
    The great sea sparkles far away,
      Beautiful, bright, as my heart remembers
    Many a dazzle of waves in May.

    Long ago as I watched them shine
    Under the boughs of fir and pine,
      Here I watch them to-day and wonder,
    Here, with my love's hand warm in mine.

    The soft wings pass that we used to chase,
    Dreams that I dreamed had left not a trace,
      The same, the same, with the bars of crimson
    The green-veined white, with its floating grace,

    The same to the least bright fleck on their wings!
    And I close my eyes, and a lost bird sings,
      And a far sea sighs, and the old sweet fragrance
    Wraps me round with the dear dead springs,

    Wraps me round with the springs to be
    When lovers that think not of you or me
      Laugh, but our eyes will be closed in darkness,
    Closed to the sky and the gorse and the sea,

    And the same great glory of ragged gold
    Once more, once more, as a tale re-told
      Shall whisper their hearts with the same sweet fragrance
    And their warm hands cling, as of old, as of old.

    Dead and un-born, the same blue skies
    Cover us! Love, as I read your eyes,
      Do I not know whose love enfolds us,
    As we fold the past in our memories,

    Past, present, future, the old and the new?
    From the depths of the grave a cry breaks through
      And trembles, a sky-lark blind in the azure,
    The depths of the all-enfolding blue.

    O, resurrection of folded years
    Deep in our hearts, with your smiles and tears,
      Dead and un-born shall not He remember
    Who folds our cry in His heart, and hears.




FOR THE EIGHTIETH BIRTHDAY OF GEORGE MEREDITH


    A health, a ringing health, unto the king
      Of all our hearts to-day! But what proud song
      Should follow on the thought, nor do him wrong?
    Except the sea were harp, each mirthful string
    The lovely lightning of the nights of Spring,
      And Dawn the lonely listener, glad and grave
      With colours of the sea-shell and the wave
    In brightening eye and cheek, there is none to sing!

    Drink to him, as men upon an Alpine peak
      Brim one immortal cup of crimson wine,
        And into it drop one pure cold crust of snow,
    Then hold it up, too rapturously to speak
      And drink--to the mountains, line on glittering line,
        Surging away into the sunset-glow.




IN MEMORY OF SWINBURNE


    I

    April from shore to shore, from sea to sea,
      April in heaven and on the springing spray
      Buoyant with birds that sing to welcome May
    And April in those eyes that mourn for thee:
    "This is my singing month; my hawthorn tree
      Burgeons once more," we seemed to hear thee say,
      "This is my singing month: my fingers stray
    Over the lute. What shall the music be?"

    And April answered with too great a song
      For mortal lips to sing or hearts to hear,
    Heard only of that high invisible throng
      For whom thy song makes April all the year!
    "My singing month, what bringest thou?" Her breath
    Swooned with all music, and she answered--"Death."


    II

    Ah, but on earth,--"can'st thou, too, die,"
      Low she whispers, "lover of mine?"
    April, queen over earth and sky
      Whispers, her trembling lashes shine:
    "Wings of the sea, good-bye, good-bye,
      Down to the dim sea-line."

    Home to the heart of thine old-world lover,
      Home to thy "fair green-girdled" sea!
    There shall thy soul with the sea-birds hover,
      Free of the deep as their wings are free;
    Free, for the grave-flowers only cover
      This, the dark cage of thee.

    Thee, the storm-bird, nightingale-souled,
      Brother of Sappho, the seas reclaim!
    Age upon age have the great waves rolled
      Mad with her music, exultant, aflame;
    Thee, thee too, shall their glory enfold,
      Lit with thy snow-winged fame.

    Back, thro' the years, fleets the sea-bird's wing:
      _Sappho, of old time, once_,--ah, hark!
    So did he love her of old and sing!
      Listen, he flies to her, back thro' the dark!
    _Sappho, of old time, once_.... Yea, Spring
      Calls him home to her, hark!

    _Sappho, long since, in the years far sped,
      Sappho, I loved thee!_ Did I not seem
    Fosterling only of earth? I have fled,
      Fled to thee, sister. Time is a dream!
    Shelley is here with us! Death lies dead!
      Ah, how the bright waves gleam.

    Wide was the cage-door, idly swinging;
      April touched me and whispered "Come."
    Out and away to the great deep winging,
      Sister, I flashed to thee over the foam,
    Out to the sea of Eternity, singing
      "Mother, thy child comes home."

       *   *   *   *

    Ah, but how shall we welcome May
      Here where the wing of song droops low,
    Here by the last green swinging spray
      Brushed by the sea-bird's wings of snow,
    We that gazed on his glorious way
      Out where the great winds blow?

    _Here upon earth--"can'st thou, too, die,
      Lover of life and lover of mine?"
    April, conquering earth and sky
      Whispers, her trembling lashes shine:
    "Wings of the sea, good-bye, good-bye,
      Down to the dim sea-line."_




ON THE DEATH OF FRANCIS THOMPSON


    I

    How grandly glow the bays
      Purpureally enwound
    With those rich thorns, the brows
      How infinitely crowned
    That now thro' Death's dark house
      Have passed with royal gaze:
    Purpureally enwound
      How grandly glow the bays.


    II

    Sweet, sweet and three-fold sweet,
      Pulsing with three-fold pain,
    Where the lark fails of flight
      Soared the celestial strain;
    Beyond the sapphire height
      Flew the gold-wingèd feet,
    Beautiful, pierced with pain,
      Sweet, sweet and three-fold sweet;


    III

    And where _Is not_ and _Is_
      Are wed in one sweet Name,
    And the world's rootless vine
      With dew of stars a-flame
    Laughs, from those deep divine
      Impossibilities,
    Our reason all to shame--
      _This cannot be, but is;_


    IV

    Into the Vast, the Deep
      Beyond all mortal sight,
    The Nothingness that conceived
      The worlds of day and night,
    The Nothingness that heaved
      Pure sides in virgin sleep,
    Brought out of Darkness, light;
      And man from out the Deep.


    V

    Into that Mystery
      Let not thine hand be thrust:
    Nothingness is a world
      Thy science well may trust ...
    But lo, a leaf unfurled,
      Nay, a cry mocking thee
    From the first grain of dust--
      _I am, yet cannot be!_


    VI

    Adventuring un-afraid
      Into that last deep shrine,
    Must not the child-heart see
      Its deepest symbol shine,
    The world's Birth-mystery,
      Whereto the suns are shade?
    Lo, the white breast divine--
      The holy Mother-maid!


    VII

    How miss that Sacrifice,
      That cross of Yea and Nay,
    That paradox of heaven
      Whose palms point either way,
    Through each a nail being driven
      That the arms out-span the skies
    And our earth-dust this day
      Out-sweeten Paradise.

    VIII

    We part the seamless robe,
      Our wisdom would divide
    The raiment of the King,
      Our spear is in His side,
    Even while the angels sing
      Around our perishing globe,
    And Death re-knits in pride
      The seamless purple robe.

       *   *   *   *


    IX

    _How grandly glow the bays
      Purpureally enwound
    With those rich thorns, the brows
      How infinitely crowned
    That now thro' Death's dark house
      Have passed with royal gaze:
    Purpureally enwound
      How grandly glow the bays._




IN MEMORY OF MEREDITH


    I

    High on the mountains, who stands proudly, clad with the light of May,
    Rich as the dawn, deep-hearted as night, diamond-bright as day,
    Who, while the slopes of the beautiful valley throb with our muffled tread
    Who, with the hill-flowers wound in her tresses, welcomes our
        deathless dead?


    II

    Is it not she whom he sought so long thro' the high lawns dewy and sweet,
    Up thro' the crags and the glittering snows faint-flushed with her
        rosy feet,
    Is it not she--the queen of our night--crowned by the unseen sun,
    Artemis, she that can see the light, when light upon earth is none?


    III

    Huntress, queen of the dark of the world (no darker at night than noon)
    Beauty immortal and undefiled, the Eternal sun's white moon,
    Only by thee and thy silver shafts for a flash can our hearts discern,
    Pierced to the quick, the love, the love that still thro' the dark
        doth yearn.


    IV

    What to his soul were the hill-flowers, what the gold at the break of day
    Shot thro' the red-stemmed firs to the lake where the swimmer
        clove his way,
    What were the quivering harmonies showered from the heaven-tossed heart
        of the lark,
    Artemis, Huntress, what were these but thy keen shafts cleaving the dark?


    V

    Frost of the hedge-row, flash of the jasmine, sparkle of dew on the leaf,
    Seas lit wide by the summer lightning, shafts from thy diamond sheaf,
    Deeply they pierced him, deeply he loved thee, now has he found thy soul,
    Artemis, thine, in this bridal peal, where we hear but the death-bell toll.




THE TESTIMONY OF ART


    As earth, sad earth, thrusts many a gloomy cape
      Into the sea's bright colour and living glee,
      So do we strive to embay that mystery
    Which earthly hands must ever let escape;
    The Word we seek for is the golden shape
      That shall enshrine the Soul we cannot see,
      A temporal chalice of Eternity
    Purple with beating blood of the hallowed grape.

    Once was it wine and sacramental bread
      Whereby we knew the power that through Him smiled
        When, in one still small utterance, He hurled
    The Eternities beneath His feet and said
      With lips, O meek as any little child,
        _Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world._




THE SCHOLARS


    Where is the scholar whose clear mind can hold
      The floral text of one sweet April mead?--
      The flowing lines, which few can spell indeed
    Though most will note the scarlet and the gold
    Around the flourishing capitals grandly scrolled;
      But ah, the subtle cadences that need
      The lover's heart, the lover's heart to read,
    And ah, the songs unsung, the tales untold.

    Poor fools-capped scholars--grammar keeps us close,
      The primers thrall us, and our eyes grow dim:
        When will old Master Science hear the call,
    Bid us run free with life in every limb
      To breathe the poems and hear the last red rose
        Gossiping over God's grey garden-wall?




RESURRECTION


    Once more I hear the everlasting sea
      Breathing beneath the mountain's fragrant breast,
    _Come unto Me, come unto Me,
      And I will give you rest._

    We have destroyed the Temple and in three days
      He hath rebuilt it--all things are made new:
    And hark what wild throats pour His praise
      Beneath the boundless blue.

    We plucked down all His altars, cried aloud
      And gashed ourselves for little gods of clay!
    Yon floating cloud was but a cloud,
      The May no more than May.

    We plucked down all His altars, left not one
      Save where, perchance (and ah, the joy was fleet),
    We laid our garlands in the sun
      At the white Sea-born's feet.

    We plucked down all His altars, not to make
      The small praise greater, but the great praise less,
    We sealed all fountains where the soul could slake
      Its thirst and weariness.

    "Love" was too small, too human to be found
      In that transcendent source whence love was born:
    We talked of "forces": heaven was crowned
      With philosophic thorn.

    "Your God is in your image," we cried, but O,
      'Twas only man's own deepest heart ye gave,
    Knowing that He transcended all ye know,
      While we--we dug His grave.

    Denied Him even the crown on our own brow,
      E'en these poor symbols of His loftier reign,
    Levelled His Temple with the dust, and now
      He is risen, He is risen again,

    Risen, like this resurrection of the year,
      This grand ascension of the choral spring,
    Which those harp-crowded heavens bend to hear
      And meet upon the wing.

    "He is dead," we cried, and even amid that gloom
      The wintry veil was rent! The new-born day
    Showed us the Angel seated in the tomb
      And the stone rolled away.

    It is the hour! We challenge heaven above
      Now, to deny our slight ephemeral breath
    Joy, anguish, and that everlasting love
      Which triumphs over death.




A JAPANESE LOVE-SONG


    I

    The young moon is white,
      But the willows are blue:
    Your small lips are red,
      But the great clouds are grey:
    The waves are so many
      That whisper to you;
    But my love is only
      One flight of spray.


    II

    The bright drops are many,
      The dark wave is one:
    The dark wave subsides,
      And the bright sea remains!
    And wherever, O singing
      Maid, you may run,
    You are one with the world
      For all your pains.


    III

    Though the great skies are dark,
      And your small feet are white,
    Though your wide eyes are blue
      And the closed poppies red,
    Tho' the kisses are many
      That colour the night,
    They are linked like pearls
      On one golden thread.


    IV

    Were the grey clouds not made
      For the red of your mouth;
    The ages for flight
      Of the butterfly years;
    The sweet of the peach
      For the pale lips of drouth,
    The sunlight of smiles
      For the shadow of tears?


    V

    Love, Love is the thread
      That has pierced them with bliss!
    All their hues are but notes
      In one world-wide tune:
    Lips, willows, and waves,
      We are one as we kiss,
    And your face and the flowers
      Faint away in the moon.



THE TWO PAINTERS

(A TALE OF OLD JAPAN.)


    I

    Yoichi Tenko, the painter,
      Dwelt by the purple sea,
    Painting the peacock islands
      Under his willow-tree:
    Also in temples he painted
      Dragons of old Japan,
    With a child to look at the pictures--
      Little O Kimi San.

    Kimi, the child of his brother,
      Bright as the moon in May,
    White as a lotus lily,
      Pink as a plum-tree spray,
    Linking her soft arm round him
      Sang to his heart for an hour,
    Kissed him with ripples of laughter
      And lips of the cherry flower.

    Child of the old pearl-fisher
      Lost in his junk at sea,
    Kimi was loved of Tenko
      As his own child might be,
    Yoichi Tenko the painter,
      Wrinkled and grey and old,
    Teacher of many disciples
      That paid for his dreams with gold.


    II

    Peonies, peonies crowned the May!
    Clad in blue and white array
      Came Sawara to the school
    Under the silvery willow-tree,
      All to learn of Tenko!
    Riding on a milk-white mule,
      Young and poor and proud was he,
    Lissom as a cherry spray
    (Peonies, peonies, crowned the day!)
    And he rode the golden way
      To the school of Tenko.

    Swift to learn, beneath his hand
    Soon he watched his wonderland
      Growing cloud by magic cloud,
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko:
    Kimi watched him, young and proud,
      Painting by the purple sea,
    Lying on the golden sand
    Watched his golden wings expand!
    (None but Love will understand
      All she hid from Tenko.)

    He could paint her tree and flower,
    Sea and spray and wizard's tower,
      With one stroke, now hard, now soft,
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko:
    He could fling a bird aloft,
      Splash a dragon in the sea,
    Crown a princess in her bower,
    With one stroke of magic power;
    And she watched him, hour by hour,
      In the school of Tenko.

    Yoichi Tenko, wondering, scanned
    All the work of that young hand,
      Gazed his kakemonos o'er,
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko:
    "I can teach you nothing more,
      Thought or craft or mystery;
    Let your golden wings expand,
    They will shadow half the land,
    All the world's at your command,
      Come no more to Tenko."

    _Lying on the golden sand,
    Kimi watched his wings expand;
    Wept.--He could not understand
      Why she wept, said Tenko._


    III

    So, in her blue kimono,
      Pale as the sickle moon
    Glimmered thro' soft plum-branches
      Blue in the dusk of June,
    Stole she, willing and waning,
      Frightened and unafraid,--
    "Take me with you, Sawara,
      Over the sea," she said.

    Small and sadly beseeching,
      Under the willow-tree,
    Glimmered her face like a foam-flake
      Drifting over the sea:
    Pale as a drifting blossom,
      Lifted her face to his eyes:
    Slowly he gathered and held her
      Under the drifting skies.

    Poor little face cast backward,
      Better to see his own,
    Earth and heaven went past them
      Drifting: they two, alone
    Stood, immortal. He whispered--
      "Nothing can part us two!"
    Backward her sad little face went
      Drifting, and dreamed it true.

    "Others are happy," she murmured,
      "Maidens and men I have seen;
    You are my king, Sawara,
      O, let me be your queen!
    If I am all too lowly,"
      Sadly she strove to smile,
    "Let me follow your footsteps,
      Your slave for a little while."

    Surely, he thought, I have painted
      Nothing so fair as this
    Moonlit almond blossom
      Sweet to fold and kiss,
    Brow that is filled with music,
      Shell of a faery sea,
    Eyes like the holy violets
      Brimmed with dew for me.

    "Wait for Sawara," he whispered,
      "Does not his whole heart yearn
    Now to his moon-bright maiden?
      Wait, for he will return
    Rich as the wave on the moon's path
      Rushing to claim his bride!"
    So they plighted their promise,
      And the ebbing sea-wave sighed.


    IV

    Moon and flower and butterfly,
    Earth and heaven went drifting by,
      Three long years while Kimi dreamed
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko,
    Steadfast while the whole world streamed
      Past her tow'rds Eternity;
    Steadfast till with one great cry,
    Ringing to the gods on high,
    Golden wings should blind the sky
      And bring him back to Tenko.

    Three long years and nought to say
    "Sweet, I come the golden way,
      Riding royally to the school
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      Claim my bride of Tenko;
    Silver bells on a milk-white mule,
      Rose-red sails on an emerald sea!" ...
    Kimi sometimes went to pray
    In the temple nigh the bay,
    Dreamed all night and gazed all day
      Over the sea from Tenko.

    Far away his growing fame
    Lit the clouds. No message came
      From the sky, whereon she gazed
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      Far away from Tenko!
    Small white hands in the temple raised
      Pleaded with the Mystery,--
    "Stick of incense in the flame,
    Though my love forget my name,
    Help him, bless him, all the same,
    And ... bring him back to Tenko!"

    _Rose-white temple nigh the bay,
    Hush! for Kimi comes to pray,
    Dream all night and gaze all day
      Over the sea from Tenko._


    V

    So, when the rich young merchant
      Showed him his bags of gold,
    Yoichi Tenko, the painter,
      Gave him her hand to hold,
    Said: "You shall wed him, O Kimi."
      Softly he lied and smiled--
    "_Yea, for Sawara is wedded!
      Let him not mock you, child._"

    Dumbly she turned and left them,
      Never a word or cry
    Broke from her lips' grey petals
      Under the drifting sky:
    Down to the spray and the rainbows,
      Where she had watched him of old
    Painting the rose-red islands,
      Painting the sand's wet gold,

    Down to their dreams of the sunset,
      Frail as a flower's white ghost,
    Lonely and lost she wandered
      Down to the darkening coast;
    Lost in the drifting midnight,
      Weeping, desolate, blind.
    Many went out to seek her:
      Never a heart could find.

    Yoichi Tenko, the painter,
      Plucked from his willow-tree
    Two big paper lanterns
      And ran to the brink of the sea;
    Over his head he held them,
      Crying, and only heard,
    Somewhere, out in the darkness,
      The cry of a wandering bird.


    VI

    Peonies, peonies thronged the May
    When in royal-rich array
      Came Sawara to the school
    Under the silvery willow-tree--
      To the school of Tenko!
    Silver bells on a milk-white mule,
      Rose-red sails on an emerald sea!
    Over the bloom of the cherry spray,
    Peonies, peonies dimmed the day;
    And he rode the royal way
      Back to Yoichi Tenko.

    Yoichi Tenko, half afraid,
    Whispered, "Wed some other maid;
      Kimi left me all alone
    Under the silvery willow-tree,
      Left me," whispered Tenko,
    "Kimi had a heart of stone!"--
      "Kimi, Kimi? Who is she?
    Kimi? Ah--the child that played
    Round the willow-tree. She prayed
    Often; and, whate'er I said,
      She believed it, Tenko."

    He had come to paint anew
    Those dim isles of rose and blue,
      For a palace far away,
    Under the silvery willow-tree--
      So he said to Tenko;
    And he painted, day by day,
      Golden visions of the sea.
    No, he had not come to woo;
    Yet, had Kimi proven true,
    Doubtless he had loved her too,
      Hardly less than Tenko.

    Since the thought was in his head,
    He would make his choice and wed;
      And a lovely maid he chose
    Under the silvery willow-tree.
      "Fairer far," said Tenko.
    "Kimi had a twisted nose,
      And a foot too small, for me,
    And her face was dull as lead!"
    "Nay, a flower, be it white or red,
    _Is_ a flower," Sawara said!
      "So it is," said Tenko.


    VII

    Great Sawara, the painter,
      Sought, on a day of days,
    One of the peacock islands
      Out in the sunset haze:
    Rose-red sails on the water
      Carried him quickly nigh;
    There would he paint him a wonder
      Worthy of Hokusai.

    Lo, as he leapt o'er the creaming
      Roses of faery foam,
    Out of the green-lipped caverns
      Under the isle's blue dome,
    White as a drifting snow-flake,
      White as the moon's white flame,
    White as a ghost from the darkness,
      Little O Kimi came.

    "Long I have waited, Sawara,
      Here in our sunset isle,
    Sawara, Sawara, Sawara,
      Look on me once, and smile;
    Face I have watched so long for,
      Hands I have longed to hold,
    Sawara, Sawara, Sawara,
      Why is your heart so cold?"

    Surely, he thought, I have painted
      Nothing so fair as this
    Moonlit almond blossom
      Sweet to fold and kiss....
    "Kimi," he said, "I am wedded!
      Hush, for it could not be!"
    "Kiss me one kiss," she whispered,
      "Me also, even me."

    Small and terribly drifting
      Backward, her sad white face
    Lifted up to Sawara
      Once, in that lonely place,
    White as a drifting blossom
      Under his wondering eyes,
    Slowly he gathered and held her
      Under the drifting skies.

    "Others are happy," she whispered,
      "Maidens and men I have seen:
    Be happy, be happy, Sawara!
      The other--shall be--your queen!
    Kiss me one kiss for parting."
      Trembling she lifted her head,
    Then like a broken blossom
      It fell on his arm. She was dead.


    VIII

    Much impressed, Sawara straight
    (Though the hour was growing late)
      Made a sketch of Kimi lying
    By the lonely, sighing sea,
      Brought it back to Tenko.
    Tenko looked it over crying
      (Under the silvery willow-tree).
    "You have burst the golden gate!
    You have conquered Time and Fate!
    Hokusai is not so great!
      This is Art," said Tenko!



THE ENCHANTED ISLAND


    I

    I remember--
                a breath, a breath
      Blown thro' the rosy gates of birth,
      A morning freshness not of the earth
    But cool and strange and lovely as death
      In Paradise, in Paradise,
    When, all to suffer the old sweet pain
      Closing his immortal eyes
      Wonder-wild an angel lies
    With wings of rainbow-tinctured grain
      Withering till--ah, wonder-wild,
    Here on the dawning earth again
      He wakes, a little child.


    II

    I remember--
                a gleam, a gleam
      Of sparkling waves and warm blue sky
    Far away and long ago,
      Or ever I knew that youth could die;
    And out of the dawn, the dawn, the dawn,
    Into the unknown life we sailed
      As out of sleep into a dream,
    And, as with elfin cables drawn
      In dusk of purple over the glowing
    Wrinkled measureless emerald sea,
    The light cloud shadows larger far
    Than the sweet shapes which drew them on,
    Elfin exquisite shadows flowing
    Between us and the morning star
    Chased us all a summer's day,
    And our sail like a dew-lit blossom shone
    Till, over a rainbow haze of spray
    That arched a reef of surf like snow
      --Far away and long ago--
    We saw the sky-line rosily engrailed
      With tufted peaks above a smooth lagoon
    Which growing, growing, growing as we sailed
      Curved all around them like a crescent moon;
    And then we saw the purple-shadowed creeks,
    The feathery palms, the gleaming golden streaks
    Of sand, and nearer yet, like jewels of fire
    Streaming between the boughs, or floating higher
    Like tiny sunset-clouds in noon-day skies,
      The birds of Paradise.


    III

    The island floated in the air,
      Its image floated in the sea:
    Which was the shadow? Both were fair:
      Like sister souls they seemed to be;
    And one was dreaming and asleep,
      And one bent down from Paradise
    To kiss with radiance in the deep
      The darkling lips and eyes.

    And, mingling softly in their dreams,
      That holy kiss of sea and sky
    Transfused the shadows and the gleams
      Of Time and of Eternity:
    The dusky face looked up and gave
      To heaven its golden shadowed calm;
    The face of light fulfilled the wave
      With blissful wings and fans of palm.

    Above, the tufted rosy peaks
      That melted in the warm blue skies,
    Below, the purple-shadowed creeks
      That glassed the birds of Paradise--
    A bridal knot, it hung in heaven;
      And, all around, the still lagoon
    From bloom of dawn to blush of even
      Curved like a crescent moon.

    And there we wandered evermore
      Thro' boyhood's everlasting years,
    Listening the murmur of the shore
      As one that lifts a shell and hears
    The murmur of forgotten seas
      Around some lost Broceliande,
    The sigh of sweet Eternities
      That turn the world to fairy-land,

    That turned our isle to a single pearl
      Glowing in measureless waves of wine!
    Above, below, the clouds would curl,
      Above, below, the stars would shine
    In sky and sea.   We hung in heaven!
      Time and space were but elfin-sweet
    Rock-bound pools for the dawn and even
      To wade with their rosy feet.

    Our pirate cavern faced the West:
      We closed its door with screens of palm,
    While some went out to seek the nest
      Wherein the Phoenix, breathing balm,
    Burns and dies to live for ever
      (How should we dream we lived to die?)
    And some would fish in the purple river
      That thro' the hills brought down the sky.

    And some would dive in the lagoon
      Like sunbeams, and all round our isle
    Swim thro' the lovely crescent moon,
      Glimpsing, for breathless mile on mile,
    The wild sea-woods that bloomed below,
      The rainbow fish, the coral cave
    Where vanishing swift as melting snow
      A mermaid's arm would wave.

    Then dashing shoreward thro' the spray
      On sun-lit sands they cast them down,
    Or in the white sea-daisies lay
      With sun-stained bodies rosy-brown,
    Content to watch the foam-bows flee
      Across the shelving reefs and bars,
    With wild eyes gazing out to sea
      Like happy haunted stars.


    IV

    And O, the wild sea-maiden
      Drifting through the starlit air,
    With white arms blossom-laden
      And the sea-scents in her hair:
    Sometimes we heard her singing
      The midnight forest through,
    Or saw a soft hand flinging
      Blossoms drenched with starry dew
    Into the dreaming purple cave;
      And, sometimes, far and far away
    Beheld across the glooming wave
      Beyond the dark lagoon,
    Beyond the silvery foaming bar,
      The black bright rock whereon she lay
    Like a honey-coloured star
      Singing to the breathless moon,
    Singing in the silent night
    Till the stars for sheer delight
    Closed their eyes, and drowsy birds
    In the midmost forest spray
    Took their heads from out their wings,
    Thinking--it is Ariel sings
    And we must catch the witching words
      And sing them o'er by day.


    V

    And then, there came a breath, a breath
    Cool and strange and dark as death,
    A stealing shadow, not of the earth
    But fresh and wonder-wild as birth.
    I know not when the hour began
    That changed the child's heart in the man,
    Or when the colours began to wane,
    But all our roseate island lay
    Stricken, as when an angel dies
    With wings of rainbow-tinctured grain
    Withering, and his radiant eyes
    Closing. Pitiless walls of grey
    Gathered around us, a growing tomb
    From which it seemed not death or doom
        Could roll the stone away.


    VI

    Yet--I remember--
                    a gleam, a gleam,
      (Or ever I dreamed that youth could die!)
      Of sparkling waves and warm blue sky
    As out of sleep into a dream,
      Wonder-wild for the old sweet pain,
      We sailed into that unknown sea
      Through the gates of Eternity.

    Peacefully close your mortal eyes
      For ye shall wake to it again
    In Paradise, in Paradise.




UNITY


    I

    Heart of my heart, the world is young;
      Love lies hidden in every rose!
    Every song that the skylark sung
      Once, we thought, must come to a close:
    Now we know the spirit of song,
      Song that is merged in the chant of the whole,
    Hand in hand as we wander along,
      What should we doubt of the years that roll?


    II

    Heart of my heart, we cannot die!
      Love triumphant in flower and tree,
    Every life that laughs at the sky
      Tells us nothing can cease to be:
    One, we are one with a song to-day,
      One with the clover that scents the wold,
    One with the Unknown, far away,
      One with the stars, when earth grows old.


    III

    Heart of my heart, we are one with the wind,
      One with the clouds that are whirled o'er the lea,
    One in many, O broken and blind,
      One as the waves are at one with the sea!
    Ay! when life seems scattered apart,
      Darkens, ends as a tale that is told,
    One, we are one, O heart of my heart,
      One, still one, while the world grows old.




THE HILL-FLOWER


    _It is my faith that every flower
      Enjoys the air it breathes_--
    So was it sung one golden hour
      Among the woodbine wreaths;
    And yet, though wet with living dew,
    The song seemed far more sweet than true.

    Blind creatures of the sun and air
      I dreamed it but a dream
    That, like Narcissus, would confer
      With self in every stream,
    And to the leaves and boughs impart
    The tremors of a human heart.

    To-day a golden pinion stirred
      The world's Bethesda pool,
    And I believed the song I heard
      Nor put my heart to school;
    And through the rainbows of the dream
    I saw the gates of Eden gleam.

    The rain had ceased.   The great hills rolled
      In silence to the deep:
    The gorse in waves of green and gold
      Perfumed their lonely sleep;
    And, at my feet, one elfin flower
    Drooped, blind with glories of the shower.

    I stooped--a giant from the sky--
      Above its piteous shield,
    And, suddenly, the dream went by,
      And there--was heaven revealed!
    I stooped to pluck it; but my hand
    Paused, mid-way, o'er its fairyland.

    Not of mine own was that strange voice,
      "Pluck--tear a star from heaven!"
    Mine only was the awful choice
      To scoff and be forgiven
    Or hear the very grass I trod
    Whispering the gentle thoughts of God.

    I know not if the hill-flower's place
      Beneath that mighty sky,
    Its lonely and aspiring grace,
      Its beauty born to die,
    Touched me, I know it seemed to be
    Cherished by all Eternity.

    Man, doomed to crush at every stride
      A hundred lives like this
    Which by their weakness were allied,
      If by naught else, to his,
    Can only for a flash discern
    What passion through the whole doth yearn.

    Not into words can I distil
      The pity or the pain
    Which hallowing all that lonely hill
      Cried out "Refrain, refrain,"
    Then breathed from earth and sky and sea,
    "Herein you did it unto Me."

    Somewhile that hill was heaven's own breast,
      The flower its joy and grief,
    Hugged close and fostered and caressed
      In every brief bright leaf:
    And, ere I went thro' sun and dew,
    I leant and gently touched it, too.




ACTÆON

    "Who stood beside the naked Swift-footed
    And bound his forehead with Proserpine's hair."

              --BROWNING (_Pauline_)


    I

    _Light of beauty, O, "perfect in whiteness,"
      Softly suffused thro' the world's dark shrouds,
    Kindling them all as they pass by thy brightness,--
      Hills, men, cities,--a pageant of clouds,
    Thou to whom Life and Time surrender
      All earth's forms as to heaven's deep care,
    Who shall pierce to thy naked splendour,
      Bind his brows with thy hair?_


    II

    Swift thro' the sprays when Spring grew bolder
      Young Actæon swept to the chase!
    Golden the fawn-skin, back from the shoulder
      Flowing, set free the limbs' lithe grace,
    Muscles of satin that rippled like sunny
      Streams--a hunter, a young athlete,
    Scattering dews and crushing out honey
      Under his sandalled feet.


    III

    Sunset softened the crags of the mountain,
      Silence melted the hunter's heart,
    Only the sob of a falling fountain
      Pulsed in a deep ravine apart:
    All the forest seemed waiting breathless,
      Eager to whisper the dying day
    Some rich word that should utter the deathless
      Secret of youth and May.


    IV

    Down, as to May thro' the flowers that attend her,
      Slowly, on tip-toe, down the ravine
    Fair as the sun-god, poising a slender
      Spear like a moon-shaft silver and green,
    Stole he! Ah, did the oak-wood ponder
      Youth's glad dream in its heart of gloom?
    Dryad or fawn was it started yonder?
      Ah, what whisper of doom?


    V

    Gold, thro' the ferns as he gazed and listened,
      Shone the soul of the wood's deep dream,
    One bright glade and a pool that glistened
      Full in the face of the sun's last gleam,--
    Gold in the heart of a violet dingle!
      Young Actæon, beware! beware!
    Who shall track, while the pulses tingle,
      Spring to her woodland lair?


    VI

    See, at his feet, what mystical quiver,
      Maiden's girdle and robe of snow,
    Tossed aside by the green glen-river
      Ere she bathed in the pool below?
    All the fragrance of April meets him
      Full in the face with its young sweet breath;
    Yet, as he steals to the glade, there greets him--
      Hush, what whisper of death?


    VII

    Lo, in the violets, lazily dreaming,
      Young Diana, the huntress, lies:
    One white side thro' the violets gleaming
      Heaves and sinks with her golden sighs,
    One white breast like a diamond crownet
      Couched in a velvet casket glows,
    One white arm, tho' the violets drown it,
      Thrills their purple with rose.


    VIII

    Buried in fragrance, the half-moon flashes,
      Beautiful, clouded, from head to heel:
    One white foot in the warm wave plashes,
      Violets tremble and half reveal,
    Half conceal, as they kiss, the slender
      Slope and curve of her sleeping limbs:
    Violets bury one half the splendour
      Still, as thro' heaven, she swims.


    IX

    Cold as the white rose waking at daybreak
      Lifts the light of her lovely face,
    Poised on an arm she watches the spray break
      Over the slim white ankle's grace,
    Watches the wave that sleeplessly tosses
      Kissing the pure foot's pink sea-shells,
    Watches the long-leaved heaven-dark mosses
      Drowning their star-bright bells.


    X

    Swift as the Spring where the South has brightened
      Earth with bloom in one passionate night,
    Swift as the violet heavens had lightened
      Swift to perfection, blinding, white,
    Dian arose: and Actæon saw her,
      Only he since the world began!
    Only in dreams could Endymion draw her
      Down to the heart of man.


    XI

    Fair as the dawn upon Himalaya
      Anger flashed from her cheek's pure rose,
    Alpine peaks at the passage of Maia
      Flushed not fair as her breasts' white snows.
    Ah, fair form of the heaven's completeness,
      Who shall sing thee or who shall say
    Whence that "high perfection of sweetness,"
      Perfect to save or slay?


    XII

    _Perfect in beauty, beauty the portal
      Here on earth to the world's deep shrine,
    Beauty hidden in all things mortal,
      Who shall mingle his eyes with thine?
    Thou, to whom Life and Death surrender
      All earth's forms as to heaven's deep care,
    Who shall pierce to thy naked splendour,
      Bind his brows with thy hair?_


    XIII

    _Beauty, perfect in blinding whiteness,
      Softly suffused thro' the world's dark shrouds,
    Kindling them all as they pass by her brightness,--
      Hills, men, cities,--a pageant of clouds,
    She, the unchanging, shepherds their changes,
      Bids them mingle and form and flow,
    Flowers and flocks and the great hill-ranges
      Follow her cry and go._


    XIV

    Swift as the sweet June lightning flashes,
      Down she stoops to the purpling pool,
    Sudden and swift her white hand dashes
      Rainbow mists in his eyes! "Ah, fool!
    Hunter," she cries to the young Actæon,
      "Change to the hunted, rise and fly,
    Swift ere the wild pack utter its pæan,
      Swift for thy hounds draw nigh!"


    XV

    Lo, as he trembles, the greenwood branches
      Dusk his brows with their antlered pride!
    Lo, as a stag thrown back on its haunches
      Quivers, with velvet nostrils wide,
    Lo, he changes! The soft fur darkens
      Down to the fetlock's lifted fear!--
    Hounds are baying!--he snuffs and hearkens,
      "Fly, for the stag is here!"


    XVI

    Swift as he leapt thro' the ferns, Actæon,
      Young Actæon, the lordly stag,
    Full and mellow the deep-mouthed pæan
      Swelled behind him from crag to crag:
    Well he remembered that sweet throat leading,
      Wild with terror he raced and strained,
    On thro' the darkness, thorn-swept, bleeding:
      Ever they gained and gained!


    XVII

    Death, like a darkling huntsman holloed--
      Swift, Actæon!--desire and shame
    Leading the pack of the passions followed.
      Red jaws frothing with white-hot flame,
    Volleying out of the glen, they leapt up,
      Snapped and fell short of the foam-flecked thighs ...
    Inch by terrible inch they crept up,
      Shadows with blood-shot eyes.


    XVIII

    Still with his great heart bursting asunder
      Still thro' the night he struggled and bled;
    Suddenly round him the pack's low thunder
      Surged, the hounds that his own hand fed
    Fastened in his throat, with red jaws drinking
      Deep!--for a moment his antlered pride
    Soared o'er their passionate seas, then, sinking,
      Fell for the fangs to divide.


    XIX

    _Light of beauty, O, perfect in whiteness,
      Softly suffused thro' the years' dark veils,
    Kindling them all as they pass by her brightness,
      Filling our hearts with her old-world tales,
    She, the unchanging, shepherds their changes,
      Bids them mingle and form and flow,
    Flowers and flocks and the great hill-ranges
      Follow her cry and go._


    XX

    Still, in the violets, lazily dreaming
      Young Diana, the huntress, lies:
    One white side thro' the violets gleaming
      Heaves and sinks with her golden sighs;
    One white breast like a diamond crownet
      Couched in a velvet casket glows,
    One white arm, tho' the violets drown it,
      Thrills their purple with rose.




LUCIFER'S FEAST

(A EUROPEAN NIGHTMARE.)


    To celebrate the ascent of man, one gorgeous night
    Lucifer gave a feast.
                          Its world-bewildering light
    Danced in Belshazzar's tomb, and the old kings dead and gone
    Felt their dust creep to jewels in crumbling Babylon.

    Two nations were His guests--the top and flower of Time,
    The fore-front of an age which now had learned to climb
    The slopes where Newton knelt, the heights that Shakespeare trod,
    The mountains whence Beethoven rolled the voice of God.

    Lucifer's feasting-lamps were like the morning stars,
    But at the board-head shone the blood-red lamp of Mars.

    League upon glittering league, white front and flabby face
    Bent o'er the groaning board. Twelve brave men droned the grace;
    But with instinctive tact, in courtesy to their Host,
    Omitted God the Son and God the Holy Ghost,
    And to the God of Battles raised their humble prayers.
    Then, then, like thunder, all the guests drew up their chairs.
    By each a drinking-cup, yellow, almost, as gold.
    (_The blue eye-sockets gave the thumbs a good firm hold_)
    Adorned the flowery board. Could even brave men shrink?

    Why if the cups _were_ skulls, they had red wine to drink!
    And had not each a napkin, white and peaked and proud,
    Waiting to wipe his mouth? A napkin? Nay, a shroud!
    This was a giant's feast, on hell's imperial scale.
    The blades glistened.

                          The shrouds--O, in one snowy gale,
    The pink hands fluttered them out, and spread them on their knees.
    Who knew what gouts might drop, what filthy flakes of grease,
    Now that o'er every shoulder, through the coiling steam,
    Inhuman faces peered, with wolfish eyes a-gleam,
    And grey-faced vampire Lusts that whinneyed in each ear
    Hints of the hideous courses?

                                 None may name them here?
    None? And we may not see! The distant cauldrons cloak
    The lava-coloured plains with clouds of umber smoke.
    Nay, by that shrapnel-light, by those wild shooting stars
    That rip the clouds away with fiercer fire than Mars,
    They are painted sharp as death. If these can eat and drink
    Chatter and laugh and rattle their knives, why should we shrink
    From empty names? We know those ghastly gleams are true:
    Why should Christ cry again--_They know not what they do?_
    They, heirs of all the ages, sons of Shakespeare's land,
    They, brothers of Beethoven, smiling, cultured, bland,
    Whisper with sidling heads to ghouls with bloody lips.

    Each takes upon his plate a small round thing that drips
    And quivers, a child's heart.

                                  Miles on miles
    The glittering table bends o'er that first course, and smiles;
    For, through the wreaths of smoke, the grey Lusts bear aloft
    The second course, on leaden chargers, large and soft,
    Bodies of women, steaming in an opal mist,
    Red-branded here and there where vampire-teeth have kissed.

    But white as pig's flesh, newly killed, and cleanly dressed,
    A lemon in each mouth and roses round each breast,
    Emblems to show how deeply, sweetly satisfied,
    The breasts, the lips, can sleep, whose children fought and died
    For--what? For country? God, once more Thy shrapnel-light!

    Let those dark slaughter-houses burst upon our sight,
    These kitchens are too clean, too near the tiring room!
    Let Thy white shrapnel rend those filthier veils of gloom,
    Rip the last fogs away and strip the foul thing bare!
    One lightning-picture--see--yon bayonet-bristling square
    Mown down, mown down, mown down, wild swathes of crimson wheat,
    The white-eyed charge, the blast, the terrible retreat,
    The blood-greased wheels of cannon thundering into line
    O'er that red writhe of pain, rent groin and shattered spine,
    The moaning faceless face that kissed its child last night,
    The raw pulp of the heart that beat for love's delight,
    The heap of twisting bodies, clotted and congealed
    In one red huddle of anguish on the loathsome field,
    The seas of obscene slaughter spewing their blood-red yeast,
    Multitudes pouring out their entrails for the feast,
    Knowing not why, but dying, they think, for some high cause,
    Dying for "hearth and home," their flags, their creeds, their laws.
    Ask of the Bulls and Bears, ask if they understand
    How both great grappling armies bleed for their own land;
    For in that faith they die! These hoodwinked thousands die
    Simply as heroes, gulled by hell's profoundest lie.
    Who keeps the slaughter-house? Not these, not these who gain
    Nought but the sergeant's shilling and the homeless pain!
    Who pulls the ropes? Not these, who buy their crust of bread
    With the salt sweat of labour! These but bury their dead
    Then sweat again for food!

                        Christ, is the hour not come,
    To send forth one great voice and strike this dark hell dumb,
    A voice to out-crash the cannon, one united cry
    To sweep these wild-beast standards down that stain the sky,

    To hurl these Lions and Bears and Eagles to their doom,
    One voice, one heart, one soul, one fire that shall consume
    The last red reeking shreds that flicker against the blast
    And purge the Augean stalls we call "our glorious past"!
    One voice from dawn and sunset, one almighty voice,
    Full-throated as the sea--ye sons o' the earth, rejoice!
    Beneath the all-loving sky, confederate kings ye stand,
    Fling open wide the gates o' the world-wide Fatherland.

       *   *   *   *

    Poor fools, we dare not dream it! We that pule and whine
    Of art and science, we, whose great souls leave no shrine
    Unshattered, we that climb the Sinai Shakespeare trod,
    The Olivets where Beethoven walked and talked with God,
    We that have weighed the stars and reined the lightning, we
    That stare thro' heaven and plant our footsteps in the sea,
    We whose great souls have risen so far above the creeds
    That we can jest at Christ and leave Him where He bleeds,
    A legend of the dark, a tale so false or true
    That howsoe'er we jest at Him, the jest sounds new.
    (Our weariest dinner-tables never tire of that!
    Let the clown sport with Christ, never the jest falls flat!)
    Poor fools, we dare not dream a dream so strange, so great,
    As on this ball of dust to found one "world-wide state,"
    To float one common flag above our little lands,
    And ere our little sun grows cold to clasp our hands
    In friendship for a moment!

       *   *   *   *

                         Hark, the violins
    Are swooning through the mist. The great blue band begins,
    Playing, in dainty scorn, a hymn we used to know,
    How long was it, ten thousand thousand years ago?

    _There is a green hill far away
      Beside a City wall!_--
    And O, the music swung a-stray
      With a solemn dying fall;
    For it was a pleasant jest to play
      Hymns in the Devil's Hall.

    And yet, and yet, if aught be true,
      This dream we left behind,
    This childish Christ, be-mocked anew
      To please the men of mind,
    Yet hung so far beyond the flight
      Of our most lofty thought
    That--Lucifer laughed _at_ us that night.
      Not _with_ us, as he ought.

    Beneath the blood-red lamp of Mars,
      Cloaked with a scarlet cloud
    He gazed along the line of stars
      Above the guzzling crowd:
    Sinister, thunder-scarred, he raised
      His great world-wandering eyes,
    And on some distant vision gazed
      Beyond our cloudy skies.

    "_Poor bats_," he sneered, "_their jungle-dark
      Civilisation's noon!
    Poor wolves, that hunt in packs and bark
      Beneath the grinning moon;
    Poor fools, that cast the cross away,
      Before they break the sword;
    Poor sots, who take the night for day;
      Have mercy on me, Lord._

    "_Beyond their wisdom's deepest skies
      I see Thee hanging yet,
    The love still hungering in Thine eyes,
      Thy plaited crown still wet!
    Thine arms outstretched to fold them all
      Beneath Thy sheltering breast;
    But--since they will not hear Thy call,
      Lord, I forbear to jest._

    "_Lord, I forbear! The day I fell
      I fell at least thro' pride!
    Rather than these should share my hell
      Take me, thou Crucified!
    O, let me share Thy cross of grief,
      And let me work Thy will,
    As morning star, or dying thief.
      Thy fallen angel still._

    "_Lord, I forbear! For Thee, at least,
      In pain so like to mine,
    The mighty meaning of their feast
      Is plain as bread and wine:
    O, smile once more, far off, alone!
      Since these nor hear nor see,
    From my deep hell, so like Thine own,
      Lord Christ, I pity Thee._"

    Yet once again, he thought, they shall be fully tried,
    If they be devils or fools too light for hell's deep pride.

    The champ of teeth was over, and the reeking room
    Gaped for the speeches now. Across the sulphurous fume
    Lucifer gave a sign. The guests stood thundering up!
    "Gentlemen, charge your glasses!"
                        Every yellow cup
    Frothed with the crimson blood. They brandished them on high!
    "Gentlemen, drink to those who fight and know not why!"

    And in the bubbling blood each nose was buried deep.
    "Gentlemen, drink to those who sowed that we might reap!
    Drink to the pomp, pride, circumstance, of glorious war,
    The grand self-sacrifice that made us what we are!
    And drink to the peace-lovers who believe that peace
    Is War, red, bloody War; for War can never cease
    Unless we drain the veins of peace to fatten WAR!
    Gentlemen, drink to the brains that made us what we are!
    Drink to self-sacrifice that helps us all to shake
    The world with tramp of armies. Germany, awake!
    England, awake! Shakespeare's, Beethoven's Fatherland,
    Are you not both aware, do you not understand,
    Self-sacrifice is competition? It is the law
    Of Life, and so, though both of you are wholly right,
    Self-sacrifice requires that both of you should fight."
    And "Hoch! hoch! hoch!" they cried; and "Hip, hip, hip, Hurrah!"

    This raised the gorge of Lucifer. With one deep "Bah,"
    Above those croaking toads he towered like Gabriel;

    Then straightway left the table and went home to hell.



VETERANS

(WRITTEN FOR THE RELIEF FUND OF THE CRIMEAN VETERANS.)


    I

    When the last charge sounds
      And the battle thunders o'er the plain,
    Thunders o'er the trenches where the red streams flow,
      Will it not be well with us,
                      Veterans, veterans,
    If, beneath your torn old flag, we burst upon the foe?


    II

    When the last post sounds
      And the night is on the battle-field,
    Night and rest at last from all the tumult of our wars,
      Will it not be well with us,
                        Veterans, veterans,
    If, with duty done like yours, we lie beneath the stars?


    III

    When the great reveille sounds
      For the terrible last Sabaoth,
    All the legions of the dead shall hear the trumpet ring!
      Will it not be well with us,
                        Veterans, veterans,
    If, beneath your torn old flag, we rise to meet our King?




THE QUEST RENEWED


    It is too soon, too soon, though time be brief,
      Quite to forswear thy quest,
    O Light, whose farewell dyes the falling leaf,
      Fades thro' the fading west.

    Thou'rt flown too soon! I stretch my hands out still,
      O, Light of Life, to Thee,
    Who leav'st an Olivet in each far blue hill,
      A sorrow on every sea.

    It is too soon, here while the loud world roars
      For wealth and power and fame,
    Too soon quite to forget those other shores
      Afar, from whence I came;

    Too soon even to forget the first dear dream
      Dreamed far away, when tears could freely flow;
    And life seemed infinite, as that sky's great gleam
      Deepened, to which I go;

    Too soon even to forget the fluttering fire
      And those old books beside the friendly hearth,
    When time seemed endless as my own desire,
      And angels walked our earth;

    Too soon quite to forget amid the throng
      What once the silent hills, the sounding beach
    Taught me--where singing was the prize of song,
      And heaven within my reach.

    It is too soon amid the cynic sneers,
      The sophist smiles, the greedy mouths and hands,
    Quite to forget the light of those dead years
      And my lost mountain-lands;

    Too soon to lose that everlasting hope
      (For so it seemed) of youth in love's pure reign,
    Though while I linger on this darkening slope
      Nought seems quite worth the pain.

    It is too soon for me to break that trust,
      O, Light of Light, flown far past sun and moon,
    Burn back thro' this dark panoply of dust;
      Or let me follow--soon.




THE LIGHTS OF HOME


    Pilot, how far from home?--
      Not far, not far to-night,
      A flight of spray, a sea-bird's flight,
    A flight of tossing foam,
      And then the lights of home!--

    And, yet again, how far?
      And seems the way so brief?
      Those lights beyond the roaring reef
    Were lights of moon and star,
      Far, far, none knows how far!

    Pilot, how far from home?--
      The great stars pass away
      Before Him as a flight of spray,
    Moons as a flight of foam!
      I see the lights of home.




NEW POEMS


'TWEEN THE LIGHTS

    "The Nine men's morrice is filled up with mud ...
    From our debate, from our dissension."

                  --SHAKESPEARE


    I

    Fairies, come back! We have not seen
    Your dusky foot-prints on the green
    This many a year. No frolic now
    Shakes the dew from the hawthorn-bough.
    Never a man and never a maid
    Spies you in the blue-bell shade;
    Yet, where the nine men's morrice stood,
    Our spades are clearing out the mud.

    _Chorus._--_Come, little irised heralds, fling
              Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
              The bright eyes and the cordial hand
              Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    II

    Fairies, come back!   Our pomp of gold,
    Our blazing noon, grows grey and old;
    The scornful glittering ages wane:
    Forgive, forget, come back again.
    This is our England's Hallowe'en!
    Come, trip it, trip it o'er the green,
    Trip it, amidst the roaring mart,
    In the still meadows of the heart.

       _Come, little irised heralds, fling
        Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
        The bright eyes and the cordial hand
        Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    III

    Fairies, come back! Once more the gleams
    Of your lost Eden haunt our dreams,
    Where Evil, at the touch of Good,
    Withers in the Enchanted Wood:
    Fairies, come back! Drive gaunt Despair
    And Famine to their ghoulish lair!
    Tap at each heart's bright window-pane
    Thro' merry England once again.

       _Come, little irised heralds, fling
        Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
        The bright eyes and the cordial hand
        Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    IV

    Fairies, come back! And, if you bring
    That long-expected song to sing,
    Ciss needs not, ere she welcomes you,
    To find a sixpence in her shoe!
    If, of the mud he clears away,
    Tom bears the ignoble stain to-day,
    Come back, and he will not forget
    The heavens that yearn beyond us yet.

       _Come, little irised heralds, fling
        Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
        The bright eyes and the cordial hand
        Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    V

    Yet, if for this you will not come,
    Your friends, the children, call you home,
    Fairies, they wear no May-day crowns,
    Your playmates in those grim black towns
    Look, fairies, how they peak and pine,
    How hungrily their great eyes shine!
    From fevered alley and foetid lane
    Plead the thin arms--_Come back again!_

      _Come, little irised heralds, fling
      Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
      The bright eyes and the cordial hand
      Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    VI

    We have named the stars and weighed the moon,
    Counted our gains and ... lost the boon,
    If _this_ be the end of all our lore--
    To draw the blind and close the door!
    O, lift the latch, slip in between
    The things which we have heard and seen,
    Slip thro' the fringes of the blind
    Into the souls of all mankind.

      _Come, little irised heralds, fling
      Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
      The bright eyes and the cordial hand
      Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    VII

    Fairies, come back! Our wisdom dies
    Beneath your deeper, starrier skies!
    We have reined the lightning, probed the flower:
    Bless, as of old, our twilight hour!
    Bring dreams, and let the dreams be true,
    Bring hope that makes each heart anew,
    Bring love that knits all hearts in one;
    Then--sing of heaven and bring the sun!

      _Come, little irised heralds, fling
      Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
      The bright eyes and the cordial hand
      Of brotherhood thro' all our land._




CREATION


    In the beginning, there was nought
      But heaven, one Majesty of Light,
    Beyond all speech, beyond all thought,
      Beyond all depth, beyond all height,
    Consummate heaven, the first and last,
      Enfolding in its perfect prime
    No future rushing to the past,
      But one rapt Now, that knew not Space or Time.

    Formless it was, being gold on gold,
      And void--but with that complete Life
    Where music could no wings unfold
      Till lo, God smote the strings of strife!
    "Myself unto Myself am Throne,
      Myself unto Myself am Thrall
    I that am All am all alone,"
      He said, "Yea, I have nothing, having all."

    And, gathering round His mount of bliss
      The angel-squadrons of His will,
    He said, "One battle yet there is
      To win, one vision to fulfil!
    Since heaven where'er I gaze expands,
      And power that knows no strife or cry,
    Weakness shall bind and pierce My hands
      And make a world for Me wherein to die.

    "All might, all vastness and all glory
      Being Mine, I must descend and make
    Out of My heart a song, a story
      Of little hearts that burn and break;
    Out of My passion without end
      I will make little azure seas,
    And into small sad fields descend
      And make green grass, white daisies, rustling trees."

    Then shrank His angels, knowing He thrust
      His arms out East and West and gave
    For every little dream of dust
      Part of His life as to a grave!
    "_Enough, O Father, for Thy words
      Have pierced Thy hands!_" But, low and sweet,
    He said "Sunsets and streams and birds,
      And drifting clouds!"--The purple stained His feet.--

    "Enough!" His angels moaned in fear,
      "_Father, Thy words have pierced Thy side!_"
    He whispered, "Roses shall grow there,
      And there must be a hawthorn-tide,
    And ferns, dewy at dawn," and still
      They moaned--"_Enough, the red drops bleed!_"
    "And," sweet and low, "on every hill,"
      He said, "I will have flocks and lambs to lead."

    His angels bowed their heads beneath
      Their wings till that great pang was gone:
    "_Pour not Thy soul out unto Death!_"
      They moaned, and still His Love flowed on,
    "There shall be small white wings to stray
      From bliss to bliss, from bloom to bloom,
    And blue flowers in the wheat;" and--"_Stay!
      Speak not_," they cried, "_the word that seals Thy tomb!_"

    He spake--"I have thought of a little child
      That I will have there to embark
    On small adventures in the wild,
      And front slight perils in the dark;
    And I will hide from him and lure
      His laughing eyes with suns and moons,
    And rainbows that shall not endure;
      And--when he is weary, sing him drowsy tunes."

    His angels fell before Him weeping
      "_Enough! Tempt not the Gates of Hell!_"
    He said, "His soul is in his keeping
      That we may love each other well,
    And lest the dark too much affright him,
      I will strow countless little stars
    Across his childish skies to light him
      That he may wage in peace his mimic wars;

    "And oft forget Me as he plays
      With swords and childish merchandize,
    Or with his elfin balance weighs,
      Or with his foot-rule metes, the skies;
    Or builds his castles by the deep,
      Or tunnels through the rocks, and then--
    Turn to Me as he falls asleep,
      And, in his dreams, feel for My hand again.

    "And when he is older he shall be
      My friend and walk here at My side;
    Or--when he wills--grow young with Me,
      And, to that happy world where once we died
    Descending through the calm blue weather,
      Buy life once more with our immortal breath,
    And wander through the little fields together,
      And taste of Love and Death."




THE PEACEMAKER.


    Silently over his vast imperial seas,
      Over his sentinel fleets the Shadow swept
      And all his armies slept.
    There was but one quick challenge at the gate,
      Then--the cold menace of that out-stretched hand,
    Waving aside the panoplies of State,
    Brought the last faithful watchers to their knees,
      And lightning flashed the grief from land to land.

    Mourn, Britain, mourn, not for a king alone!
    This was the people's king! His purple throne
      Was in their hearts. They shared it. Millions of swords
    Could not have shaken it! Sharers of this doom,
    This democratic doom which all men know,
    His Common-weal, in this great common woe,
      Veiling its head in the universal gloom,
    With that majestic grief which knows not words,
      Bows o'er a world-wide tomb.

    Mourn, Europe, for our England set this Crown
      In splendour past the reach of temporal power,
      Secure above the thunders of the hour,
    A sun in the great skies of her renown,
      A sun to hold her wheeling worlds in one
    By its own course of duty pre-ordained,
      Where'er the meteors flash and fall, a sun
    With its great course of duty!

                                   So he reigned,
      And died in its observance. Mightier he
    Than any despot, in his people's love,
    He served that law which rules the Thrones above,
      That world-wide law which by the raging sea
    Abased the flatterers of Canúte and makes
      The King that abnegates all lesser power
      A rock in time of trouble, and a tower
    Of strength where'er the tidal tempest breaks;
      That world-wide law whose name is harmony,
    Whose service perfect freedom!

                                   And _his_ name
    _The Peacemaker_, through all the future years
    Shall burn, a glorious and prophetic flame,
    A beaconing sun that never shall go down,
      A sun to speed the world's diviner morrow,
      A sun that shines the brighter for our sorrow;
    For, O, what splendour in a monarch's crown
      Vies with the splendour of his people's tears?

    And now, O now, while the sorrowful trumpet is blown,
    From island to continent, zone to imperial zone,
    And the flags of the nations are lowered in grief with our own;
    Now, while the roll of the drums that for battle were dumb
    When he reigned, salute his passing; and low on the breeze
    From the snow-bound North to the Australasian seas
    Surges the solemn lament--O, shall it not come,
    A glimpse of that mightier union of all mankind?
    Now, though our eyes, as they gaze on the vision, grow blind,
    Now, while the world is all one funeral knell,
    And the mournful cannon thunder his great farewell,
    Now, while the bells of a thousand cities toll,
    Remember, O England, remember the ageless goal,
    Rally the slumbering faith in the depths of thy soul,
    Lift up thine eyes to the Kingdom for which he fought,
    That Empire of Peace and Good-will, for which to his death-hour he wrought.
    Then, then while the pomp of the world seems a little thing,
      Ay, though by the world it be said,
        _The King is dead!_
    We shall lift up our hearts and answer--_Long live the King!_




THE SAILOR-KING


    The fleet, the fleet puts out to sea
      In a thunder of blinding foam to-night,
    With a bursting wreck-strewn reef to lee,
      But--a seaman fired yon beacon-light!
    Seamen hailing a seaman, know--
      Free-men crowning a free-man, sing--
    The worth of that light where the great ships go,
      The signal-fire of the king.

    Cloud and wind may shift and veer:
      This is steady and this is sure,
    A signal over our hope and fear,
      A pledge of the strength that shall endure--
    Having no part in our storm-tossed strife--
      A sign of union, which shall bring
    Knowledge to men of their close-knit life,
      The signal-fire of the king.

    His friends are the old grey glorious waves,
      The wide world round, the wide world round,
    That have roared with our guns and covered our graves
      From Nombre Dios to Plymouth Sound;
    And his crown shall shine, a central sun
      Round which the planet-nations sing,
    Going their ways, but linked in one,
      As the ships of our sailor-king.

    Many the ships, but a single fleet;
      Many the roads, but a single goal;
    And a light, a light where all roads meet,
      The beacon-fire of an Empire's soul;
    The worth of that light his seamen know,
      Through all the deaths that the storm can bring
    The crown of their comrade-ship a-glow,
      The signal-fire of the king.




THE FIDDLER'S FAREWELL


    With my fiddle to my shoulder,
      And my hair turning grey,
    And my heart growing older
      I must shuffle on my way!
    Tho' there's not a hearth to greet me
      I must reap as I sowed,
    And--the sunset shall meet me
      At the turn of the road.

    O, the whin's a dusky yellow
      And the road a rosy white,
    And the blackbird's call is mellow
      At the falling of night;
    And there's honey in the heather
      Where we'll make our last abode,
    My tunes and me together
      At the turn of the road.

    I have fiddled for your city
      Thro' market-place and inn!
    I have poured forth my pity
      On your sorrow and your sin!
    But your riches are your burden,
      And your pleasure is your goad!
    I've the whin-gold for guerdon
      At the turn of the road.

    Your village-lights 'll call me
      As the lights of home the dead;
    But a black night befall me
      Ere your pillows rest my head!
    God be praised, tho' like a jewel
      Every cottage casement showed,
    There's a star that's not so cruel
      At the turn of the road.

    Nay, beautiful and kindly
      Are the faces drawing nigh,
    But I gaze on them blindly
      And hasten, hasten by;
    For O, no face of wonder
      On earth has ever glowed
    Like the One that waits me yonder
      At the turn of the road.

    Her face is lit with splendour,
      She dwells beyond the skies;
    But deep, deep and tender
      Are the tears in her eyes:
    The angels see them glistening
      In pity for my load,
    And--she's waiting there, she's listening,
      At the turn of the road.




TO A PESSIMIST


    Life like a cruel mistress woos
      The passionate heart of man, you say,
    Only in mockery to refuse
      His love, at last, and turn away.

    To me she seems a queen that knows
      How great is love--but ah, how rare!--
    And, pointing heavenward ere she goes,
      Gives him the rose from out her hair.




MOUNT IDA

[This poem commemorates an event of some years ago, when a young
Englishman--still remembered by many of his contemporaries at
Oxford--went up into Mount Ida and was never seen again.]


    I

    Not cypress, but this warm pine-plumage now
      Fragrant with sap, I pluck; nor bid you weep,
    Ye Muses that still haunt the heavenly brow
      Of Ida, though the ascent is hard and steep:
    Weep not for him who left us wrapped in sleep
      At dawn beneath the holy mountain's breast
        And all alone from Ilion's gleaming shore
    Clomb the high sea-ward glens, fain to drink deep
      Of earth's old glory from your silent crest,
              Take the cloud-conquering throne
              Of gods, and gaze alone
    Thro' heaven. Darkling we slept who saw his face no more.


    II

    Ah yet, in him hath Lycidas a brother,
      And Adonaïs will not say him nay,
    And Thyrsis to the breast of one sweet Mother
      Welcomes him, climbing by the self-same way:
    Quietly as a cloud at break of day
      Up the long glens of golden dew he stole
        (And surely Bion called to him afar!)
    The tearful hyacinths and the greenwood spray
      Clinging to keep him from the sapphire goal,
              Kept of his path no trace!
              Upward the yearning face
    Clomb the ethereal height, calm as the morning star.


    III

    Ah yet, incline, dear Sisters, or my song
      That with the light wings of the skimming swallow
    Must range the reedy slopes, will work him wrong!
      And with some golden shaft do thou, Apollo,
    Show the pine-shadowed path that none may follow;
      For, as the blue air shuts behind a bird,
        Round him closed Ida's cloudy woods and rills!
    Day-long, night-long, by echoing height and hollow,
      We called him, but our tumult died unheard:
              Down from the scornful sky
              Our faint wing-broken cry
    Fluttered and perished among the many-folded hills.


    IV

    Ay, though we clomb each faint-flushed peak of vision,
      Nought but our own sad faces we divined:
    Thy radiant way still laughed us to derision,
      And still revengeful Echo proved unkind;
    And oft our faithless hearts half feared to find
      Thy cold corse in some dark mist-drenched ravine
        Where the white foam flashed headlong to the sea:
    How should we find thee, spirits deaf and blind
      Even to the things which we had heard and seen?
              Eyes that could see no more
              The old light on sea and shore,
    What should they hope or fear to find? They found not thee;


    V

    For thou wast ever alien to our skies,
      A wistful stray of radiance on this earth,
    A changeling with deep memories in thine eyes
      Mistily gazing thro' our loud-voiced mirth
    To some fair land beyond the gates of birth;
      Yet as a star thro' clouds, thou still didst shed
        Through our dark world thy lovelier, rarer glow;
    Time, like a picture of but little worth,
      Before thy young hand lifelessly outspread,
              At one light stroke from thee
              Gleamed with Eternity;
    Thou gav'st the master's touch, and we--we did not know.


    VI

    Not though we gazed from heaven o'er Ilion
      Dreaming on earth below, mistily crowned
    With towering memories, and beyond her shone
      The wine-dark seas Achilles heard resound!
    Only, and after many days, we found
      Dabbled with dew, at border of a wood
        Bedded in hyacinths, open and a-glow
    Thy Homer's Iliad.... Dryad tears had drowned
      The rough Greek type and, as with honey or blood,
              One crocus with crushed gold
              Stained the great page that told
    Of gods that sighed their loves on Ida, long ago.


    VII

    See--_for a couch to their ambrosial limbs
      Even as their golden load of splendour presses
    The fragrant thyme, a billowing cloud up-swims
      Of springing flowers beneath their deep caresses,
    Hyacinth, lotus, crocus, wildernesses
      Of bloom_ ... but clouds of sunlight and of dew
        Dropping rich balm, round the dark pine-woods curled
    That the warm wonder of their in-woven tresses,
      And all the secret blisses that they knew,
              Where beauty kisses truth
              In heaven's deep heart of youth,
    Might still be hidden, as thou art, from the heartless world.


    VIII

    Even as we found thy book, below these rocks
      Perchance that strange great eagle's feather lay,
    When Ganymede, from feeding of his flocks
      On Ida, vanished thro' the morning grey:
    Stranger it seemed, if thou couldst cast away
      Those golden musics as a thing of nought,
        A dream for which no longer thou hadst need!
    Ah, was it here then that the break of day
      Brought thee the substance for the shadow, taught
              Thy soul a swifter road
              To ease it of its load
    And watch this world of shadows as a dream recede?


    IX

    We slept! Darkling we slept! Our busy schemes,
      Our cold mechanic world awhile was still;
    But O, their eyes are blinded even in dreams
      Who from the heavenlier Powers withdraw their will:
    Here did the dawn with purer light fulfil
      Thy happier eyes than ours, here didst thou see
        The quivering wonder-light in flower and dew,
    The quickening glory of the haunted hill,
      The Hamadryad beckoning from the tree.
              The Naiad from the stream;
              While from her long dark dream
    Earth woke, trembling with life, light, beauty, through and through.


    X

    And the everlasting miracle of things
      Flowed round thee, and this dark earth opposed no bar,
    And radiant faces from the flowers and springs
      Dawned on thee, whispering, _Knowest thou whence_ we _are_?
    Faintly thou heardst us calling thee afar
      As Hylas heard, swooning beneath the wave,
        Girdled with glowing arms, while wood and glen
    Echoed his name beneath that rosy star;
      And thy farewell came faint as from the grave
              For very bliss; but we
              Could neither hear nor see;
    And all the hill with _Hylas! Hylas!_ rang again.


    XI

    But there were deeper love-tales for thine ears
      Than mellow-tongued Theocritus could tell:
    Over him like a sea two thousand years
      Had swept. They solemnized his music well!
    Farewell! What word could answer but farewell,
      From thee, O happy spirit, that couldst steal
        So quietly from this world at break of day?
    What voice of ours could break the silent spell
      Beauty had cast upon thee, or reveal
              The gates of sun and dew
              Which oped and let thee through
    And led thee heavenward by that deep enchanted way?


    XII

    Yet here thou mad'st thy choice: Love, Wisdom, Power,
      As once before young Paris, they stood here!
    Beneath them Ida, like one full-blown flower,
      Shed her bloom earthward thro' the radiant air
    Leaving her rounded fruit, their beauty, bare
      To the everlasting dawn; and, in thy palm
        The golden apple of the Hesperian isle
    Which thou must only yield to the Most Fair;
      But not to Juno's great luxurious calm,
              Nor Dian's curved white moon,
              Gav'st thou the sunset's boon,
    Nor to foam-bosomed Aphrodite's rose-lipped smile.


    XIII

    Here didst thou make the eternal choice aright,
      Here, in this hallowed haunt of nymph and faun,
    They stood before thee in that great new light,
      The three great splendours of the immortal dawn,
    With all the cloudy veils of Time withdrawn
      Or only glistening round the firm white snows
        Of their pure beauty like the golden dew
    Brushed from the feathery ferns below the lawn;
      But not to cold Diana's morning rose,
              Nor to great Juno's frown
              Cast thou the apple down,
    And, when the Paphian raised her lustrous eyes anew,


    XIV

    Thou from thy soul didst whisper--_in that heaven
      Which yearns beyond us! Lead me up the height!
    How should the golden fruit to one be given
      Till your three splendours in that Sun unite
    Where each in each ye move like light in light?
      How should I judge the rapture till I know
        The pain?_ And like three waves of music there
    They closed thee round, blinding thy blissful sight
      With beauty and, like one roseate orb a-glow,
              They bore thee on their breasts
              Up the sun-smitten crests
    And melted with thee smiling into the Most Fair.


    XV

    Upward and onward, ever as ye went
      The cities of the world nestled beneath
    Closer, as if in love, round Ida, blent
      With alien hills in one great bridal-wreath
    Of dawn-flushed clouds; while, breathing with your breath
      New heavens mixed with your mounting bliss. Deep eyes,
        Beautiful eyes, imbrued with the world's tears
    Dawned on you, beautiful gleams of Love and Death
      Flowed thro' your questioning with divine replies
              From that ineffable height
              Dark with excess of light
    Where the Ever-living dies and the All-loving hears.


    XVI

    For thou hadst seen what tears upon man's face
      Bled from the heart or burned from out the brain,
    And not denied or cursed, but couldst embrace
      Infinite sweetness in the heart of pain,
    And heardst those universal choirs again
      Wherein like waves of one harmonious sea
        All our slight dreams of heaven are singing still,
    And still the throned Olympians swell the strain,
      And, hark, the burden, of all--_Come unto Me!_
              Sky into deepening sky
              Melts with that one great cry;
    And the lost doves of Ida moan on Siloa's hill.


    XVII

    I gather all the ages in my song
      And send them singing up the heights to thee!
    Chord by æonian chord the stars prolong
      Their passionate echoes to Eternity:
    Earth wakes, and one orchestral symphony
      Sweeps o'er the quivering harp-strings of mankind;
        Grief modulates into heaven, hate drowns in love,
    No strife now but of love in that great sea
      Of song!   I dream!   I dream!   Mine eyes grow blind:
              Chords that I not command
              Escape the fainting hand;
    Tears fall. Thou canst not hear. Thou'rt still too far above.


    XVIII

    Farewell!   What word should answer but farewell
      From thee, O happy spirit, whose clear gaze
    Discerned the path--clear, but unsearchable--
      Where Olivet sweetens, deepens, Ida's praise,
    The path that strikes as thro' a sunlit haze
      Through Time to that clear reconciling height
        Where our commingling gleams of godhead dwell;
    Strikes thro' the turmoil of our darkling days
      To that great harmony where, like light in light,
              Wisdom and Beauty still
              Haunt the thrice-holy hill,
    And Love, immortal Love ... what answer but farewell?




THE ELECTRIC TRAM


    I

    Bluff and burly and splendid
            Thro' roaring traffic-tides,
    By secret lightnings attended
            The land-ship hisses and glides.
    And I sit on its bridge and I watch and I dream
            While the world goes gallantly by,
    With all its crowded houses and its colored shops a-stream
            Under the June-blue sky,
                    Heigh, ho!
            Under the June-blue sky.


    II

    There's a loafer at the kerb with a sulphur-coloured pile
            Of "Lights! Lights! Lights!" to sell;
    And a flower-girl there with some lilies and a smile
            By the gilt swing-doors of a drinking hell,
    Where the money is rattling loud and fast,
    And I catch one glimpse as the ship swings past
            Of a woman with a babe at her breast
              Wrapped in a ragged shawl;
            She is drinking away with the rest,
              And the sun shines over it all,
                    Heigh, ho!
              The sun shines over it all!


    III

    And a barrel-organ is playing,
            Somewhere, far away,
    _Abide with me_, and _The world is gone a-maying_,
            And _What will the policeman say?_
    There's a glimpse of the river down an alley by a church,
            And the barges with their tawny-coloured sails,
    And a grim and grimy coal-wharf where the London pigeons perch
            And flutter and spread their tails,
                    Heigh, ho!
            Flutter and spread their tails.


    IV

    O, what does it mean, all the pageant and the pity,
            The waste and the wonder and the shame?
    I am riding tow'rds the sunset thro' the vision of a City
            Which we cloak with the stupor of a name!
    I am riding thro' ten thousand thousand tragedies and terrors,
            Ten million heavens that save and hells that damn;
    And the lightning draws my car tow'rds the golden evening star;
            And--They call it only "riding on a tram,"
                    Heigh, ho!
            They call it only "riding on a tram."




SHERWOOD


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA

ROBIN                    Earl of Huntingdon, known as "Robin Hood."

LITTLE JOHN            }
FRIAR TUCK             }
WILL SCARLET           } Outlaws and followers of "Robin Hood."
REYNOLD GREENLEAF      }
MUCH, THE MILLER'S SON }
ALLAN-A-DALE           }

PRINCE JOHN.
KING RICHARD, Coeur de Lion.
BLONDEL                  King Richard's minstrel.
OBERON                   King of the Fairies.
TITANIA                  Queen of the Fairies.
PUCK                     A Fairy.
THE SHERIFF OF NOTTINGHAM.
FITZWALTER               Father of Marian, known as "Maid Marian."
SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF         A Fool.
ARTHUR PLANTAGENET       Nephew to Prince John, a boy of about ten years of age.
QUEEN ELINOR             Mother of Prince John and Richard Lion-Heart.
MARIAN FITZWALTER        Known as Maid Marian, betrothed to Robin Hood.
JENNY                    Maid to Marian.
WIDOW SCARLET            Mother of Will Scarlet.
PRIORESS OF KIRKLEE.

Fairies, merry men, serfs, peasants, mercenaries, an abbot, a baron, a
novice, nuns, courtiers, soldiers, retainers, etc.




ACT I


SCENE I. _Night. The borders of the forest. The smouldering embers of a
Saxon homestead. The SHERIFF and his men are struggling with a SERF._

    SERF

    No, no, not that! not that! If you should blind me
    God will repay you. Kill me out of hand!

    [_Enter PRINCE JOHN and several of his retainers._]

    JOHN

    Who is this night-jar?

    [_The retainers laugh._]

                                 Surely, master Sheriff,
    You should have cut its tongue out, first. Its cries
    Tingle so hideously across the wood
    They'll wake the King in Palestine. Small wonder
    That Robin Hood evades you.

    SHERIFF

    [_To the SERF._]

                                      Silence, dog,
    Know you not better than to make this clamour
    Before Prince John?

    SERF

                           Prince John! It is Prince John!
    For God's love save me, sir!

    JOHN

                                Whose thrall is he?

    SHERIFF

    I know not, sir, but he was caught red-handed
    Killing the king's deer. By the forest law
    He should of rights be blinded; for, as you see,

    [_He indicates the SERF'S right hand._]

    'Tis not his first deer at King Richard's cost.

    JOHN

         'Twill save you trouble if you say at mine.

    SHERIFF

    Ay, sir, I pray your pardon--at _your_ cost!
    His right hand lacks the thumb and arrow-finger,
    And though he vows it was a falling tree
    That crushed them, you may trust your Sheriff, sir,
    It was the law that clipped them when he last
    Hunted your deer.

    SERF

                Prince, when the Conqueror came,
    They burned my father's homestead with the rest
    To make the King a broader hunting-ground.
    I have hunted there for food. How could I bear
    To hear my hungry children crying? Prince,
    They'll make good bowmen for your wars, one day.

    JOHN

    He is much too fond of 'Prince': he'll never live
    To see a king. Whose thrall?--his iron collar,
    Look, is the name not on it?

    SHERIFF

                                 Sir, the name
    Is filed away, and in another hour
    The ring would have been broken. He is one of those
    Green adders of the moon, night-creeping thieves
    Whom Huntingdon has tempted to the woods.
    These desperate ruffians flee their lawful masters
    And flock around the disaffected Earl
    Like ragged rooks around an elm, by scores!
    And now, i' faith, the sun of Huntingdon
    Is setting fast. They've well nigh beggared him,
    Eaten him out of house and home. They say
    That, when we make him outlaw, we shall find
    Nought to distrain upon, but empty cupboards.

    JOHN

    Did you not serve him once yourself?

    SHERIFF

                                          Oh, ay,
    He was more prosperous then. But now my cupboards
    Are full, and his are bare. Well, I'd think scorn
    To share a crust with outcast churls and thieves,
    Doffing his dignity, letting them call him
    Robin, or Robin Hood, as if an Earl
    Were just a plain man, which he will be soon,
    When we have served our writ of outlawry!
    'Tis said he hopes much from the King's return
    And swears by Lion-Heart; and though King Richard
    Is brother to yourself, 'tis all the more
    Ungracious, sir, to hope he should return,
    And overset your rule. But then--to keep
    Such base communications! Myself would think it
    Unworthy of my sheriffship, much more
    Unworthy a right Earl.

    JOHN

                           You talk too much!
    This whippet, here, slinks at his heel, you say.
    Mercy may close her eyes, then. Take him off,
    Blind him or what you will; and let him thank
    His master for it. But wait--perhaps he knows
    Where we may trap this young patrician thief.
    Where is your master?

    SERF

                          Where you'll never find him.

    JOHN

    Oh, ho! the dog is faithful! Take him away.
    Get your red business done, I shall require
    Your men to ride with me.

    SHERIFF

    [_To his men._]

                              Take him out yonder,
    A bow-shot into the wood, so that his clamour
    Do not offend my lord. Delay no time,
    The irons are hot by this. They'll give you light
    Enough to blind him by.

    SERF

    [_Crying out and struggling as he is forced back into the forest._]

                            No, no, not that!
    God will repay you! Kill me out of hand!

    SHERIFF

    [_To PRINCE JOHN._]

    There is a kind of justice in all this.
    The irons being heated in that fire, my lord,
    Which was his hut, aforetime.

    [_Some of the men take the glowing irons from the fire and follow
    into the wood._]

                                              There's no need
    To parley with him, either. The snares are laid
    For Robin Hood. He goes this very night
    To his betrothal feast.

    JOHN

                              Betrothal feast!

    SHERIFF

    At old Fitzwalter's castle, sir.

    JOHN

                                        Ha! ha!
    There will be one more guest there than he thought!
    Ourselves are riding thither. We intended
    My Lady Marian for a happier fate
    Than bride to Robin Hood. Your plans are laid
    To capture him?

    SHERIFF

    [_Consequentially._]

                                    It was our purpose, sir,
    To serve the writ of outlawry upon him
    And capture him as he came forth.

    JOHN

                                     That's well.
    Then--let him disappear--you understand?

    SHERIFF

    I have your warrant, sir? Death? A great Earl?

    JOHN

    Why, first declare him outlawed at his feast!
    'Twill gladden the tremulous heart of old Fitzwalter
    With his prospective son-in-law; and then--
    No man will overmuch concern himself
    Whither an outlaw goes. You understand?

    SHERIFF

    It shall be done, sir.

    JOHN

                            But the Lady Marian!
    By heaven, I'll take her. I'll banish old Fitzwalter
    If he prevent my will in this. You'll bring
    How many men to ring the castle round?

    SHERIFF

    A good five score of bowmen.

    JOHN

                                Then I'll take her
    This very night as hostage for Fitzwalter,
    Since he consorts with outlaws. These grey rats
    Will gnaw my kingdom's heart out. For 'tis mine,
    This England, now or later. They that hold
    By Richard, as their absent king, would make
    My rule a usurpation. God, am I
    My brother's keeper?

    [_There is a cry in the forest from the SERF, who immediately
    afterwards appears at the edge of the glade, shaking
    himself free from his guards. He seizes a weapon
    and rushes at PRINCE JOHN. One of the retainers runs
    him through and he falls at the PRINCE'S feet._]

    JOHN

                          That's a happy answer!

    SHERIFF

    [_Stooping over the body._]

    He is dead.

    JOHN

                  I am sorry. It were better sport
    To send him groping like a hoodman blind
    Through Sherwood, whimpering for his Robin. Come,
    I'll ride with you to this betrothal feast.
    Now for my Lady Marian!

    [_Exeunt all. A pause. The scene darkens. Shadowy figures creep
    out from the thickets, of old men, women and children._]

    FIRST OLD MAN

    [_Stretching his arms up to Heaven._]

                                    God, am I
    My brother's keeper? Witness, God in heaven,
    He said it and not we--Cain's word, he said it!

    FIRST WOMAN

    [_Kneeling by the body._]

    O Father, Father, and the blood of Abel
    Cries to thee!

    A BLIND MAN

                    Is there any light here still?
    I feel a hot breath on my face. The dark
    Is better for us all. I am sometimes glad
    They blinded me those many years ago.
    Princes are princes; and God made the world
    For one or two it seems.   Well, I am glad
    I cannot see His world.

    FIRST WOMAN

    [_Still by the body and whispering to the others._]

                              Keep him away.
    'Tis as we thought. The dead man is his son.
    Keep him away, poor soul. He need not know.

    [_Some of the men carry the body among the thickets._]

    A CHILD

    Mother, I'm hungry, I'm hungry!

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                    There's no food
    For any of us to-night. The snares are empty,
    And I can try no more.

    THE BLIND MAN

                          Wait till my son
    Comes back. He's a rare hunter is my boy.
    You need not fret, poor little one. My son
    Is much too quick and clever for the Sheriff.
    He'll bring you something good. Why, ha! ha! ha!
    Friends, I've a thought--the Sheriff's lit the fire
    Ready for us to roast our meat. Come, come,
    Let us be merry while we may! My boy
    Will soon come back with food for the old folks.
    The fire burns brightly, eh?

    SECOND OLD MAN

                                The fire that feeds
    On hope and eats our hearts away. They've burnt
    Everything, everything!

    THE BLIND MAN

                            Ah, princes are princes!
    But when the King comes home from the Crusade,
    We shall have better times.

    FIRST OLD MAN

                              Ay, when the King
    Comes home from the Crusade.

    CHILD

                                  Mother, I'm hungry.

    SECOND WOMAN

    Oh, but if I could only find a crust
    Left by the dogs. Masters, the child will starve.
    We must have food.

    THE BLIND MAN

                      I tell you when my boy
    Comes back, we shall have plenty!

    FIRST WOMAN

                                      God pity thee!

    THE BLIND MAN

    What dost thou mean?

    SECOND WOMAN

                        Masters, the child will starve.

    FIRST OLD MAN

    Hist, who comes here--a forester?

    THE BLIND MAN

                                      We'd best
    Slip back into the dark.

    FIRST WOMAN

    [_Excitedly._]

                            No, stay! All's well.
    There's Shadow-of-a-Leaf, good Lady Marian's fool
    Beside him!

    THE BLIND MAN

                    Ah, they say there's fairy blood
    In Shadow-of-a-Leaf. But I've no hopes of more
    From him, than wild bees' honey-bags.

    [_Enter LITTLE JOHN, a giant figure, leading a donkey, laden
    with a sack. On the other side, SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF
    trips, a slender figure in green trunk-hose and doublet.
    He is tickling the donkey's ears with a long fern._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                        Gee! Whoa!
    Neddy, my boy, have you forgot the Weaver,
    And how Titania tickled your long ears?
    Ha! ha! Don't ferns remind you?

    LITTLE JOHN

                                      Friends, my master
    Hath sent me to you, fearing ye might hunger.

    FIRST OLD MAN

    Thy master?

    LITTLE JOHN

                   Robin Hood.

    SECOND WOMAN

    [_Falling on her knees._]

                                God bless his name.
    God bless the kindly name of Robin Hood.

    LITTLE JOHN

    [_Giving them food._]

    'Tis well nigh all that's left him; and to-night
    He goes to his betrothal feast.

    [_All the outcasts except the first old man exeunt._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Pointing to the donkey._]

                                  Now look,
    There's nothing but that shadow of a cross
    On his grey back to tell you of the palms
    That once were strewn before my Lord, the King.
    Won't ferns, won't branching ferns, do just as well?
    There's only a dream to ride my donkey now!
    But, Neddy, I'll lead you home and cry--HOSANNA!
    We'll thread the glad Gate Beautiful again,
    Though now there's only a Fool to hold your bridle
    And only moonlit ferns to strew your path,
    And the great King is fighting for a grave
    In lands beyond the sea.   Come, Neddy, come,
    Hosanna!

    [_Exit SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF with the donkey. He strews ferns
    before it as he goes._]

    FIRST OLD MAN

              'Tis a strange creature, master! Thinkest
    There's fairy blood in him?

    LITTLE JOHN

                                'Twas he that brought
    Word of your plight to Robin Hood. He flits
    Like Moonshine thro' the forest. He'll be home
    Before I know it. I must be hastening back.
    This makes a sad betrothal night.

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                    That minds me,
    Couched in the thicket yonder, we overheard
    The Sheriff tell Prince John....

    LITTLE JOHN

                                      Prince John!

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                              You'd best
    Warn Robin Hood. They're laying a trap for him.
    Ay! Now I mind me of it! I heard 'em say
    They'd take him at the castle.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                   To-night?

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                          To-night!
    Fly, lad, for God's dear love. Warn Robin Hood!
    Fly like the wind, or you'll be there too late.
    And yet you'd best be careful. There's five score
    In ambush round the castle.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                I'll be there
    An if I have to break five hundred heads!

    [_He rushes off thro' the forest. The old man goes into the thicket
    after the others. The scene darkens. A soft light, as
    of the moon, appears between the ferns to the right of the
    glade, showing OBERON and TITANIA._]

    TITANIA

    Yet one night more the gates of fairyland
    Are opened by a mortal's kindly deed.

    OBERON

    Last night the gates were shut, and I heard weeping!
    Men, women, children, beat upon the gates
    That guard our happy world. They could not sleep.
    Titania, must not that be terrible,
    When mortals cannot sleep?

    TITANIA

                              Yet one night more
    Dear Robin Hood has opened the gates wide
    And their poor weary souls can enter in.

    OBERON

    Yet one night more we woodland elves may steal
    Out thro' the gates.   I fear the time will come
    When they must close for ever; and we no more
    Shall hold our Sherwood revels.

    TITANIA

                                  Only love
    And love's kind sacrifice can open them.
    For when a mortal hurts himself to help
    Another, then he thrusts the gates wide open
    Between his world and ours.

    OBERON

                              Ay, but that's rare,
    That kind of love, Titania, for the gates
    Are almost always closed.

    TITANIA

                              Yet one night more!
    Hark, how the fairy host begins to sing
    Within the gates. Wait here and we shall see
    What weary souls by grace of Robin Hood
    This night shall enter Dreamland. See, they come!

    [_The soft light deepens in the hollow among the ferns and the ivory
    gates of Dreamland are seen swinging open. The fairy
    host is heard, singing to invite the mortals to enter._]

    [_Song of the fairies._]

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        Your world is growing old;
      But a Princess sleeps in the greenwood,
        Whose hair is brighter than gold.

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        O hearts that bleed and burn,
      Her lips are redder than roses,
        Who sleeps in the faëry fern.

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        By the Beauty that wakes anew
      Milk-white with the fragrant hawthorn
        In the drip of the dawn-red dew.

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        O hearts that are weary of pain,
      Come back to your home in Faërie
        And wait till she wakes again.

    [_The victims of the forest-laws steal out of the thicket once
    more--dark, distorted, lame, blind, serfs with iron collars
    round their necks, old men, women and children; and as the fairy
    song breaks into chorus they pass in procession thro' the
    beautiful gates. The gates slowly close. The fairy song is heard
    as dying away in the distance._]

    TITANIA

    [_Coming out into the glade and holding up her hands to the evening
    star beyond the tree-tops._]

    Shine, shine, dear star of Love, yet one night more.


SCENE II. _A banqueting hall in FITZWALTER'S castle. The guests are
assembling for the betrothal feast of ROBIN and MARIAN. Some of ROBIN
HOOD'S men, clad in Lincoln green, are just arriving at the doors.
SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF runs forward to greet them._

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Come in, my scraps of Lincoln green; come in,
    My slips of greenwood. You're much wanted here!
    Head, heart and eyes, we are all pent up in walls
    Of stone--nothing but walls on every side--
    And not a rose to break them--big blind walls,
    Neat smooth stone walls! Come in, my ragged robins;
    Come in, my jolly minions of the moon,
    My straggling hazel-boughs! Hey, bully friar,
    Come in, my knotted oak! Ho, little Much,
    Come in, my sweet green linnet. Come, my cushats,
    Larks, yellow-hammers, fern-owls, Oh, come in,
    Come in, my Dian's foresters, and drown us
    With may, with blossoming may!

    FITZWALTER

                                    Out, Shadow-of-a-Leaf!
    Welcome, welcome, good friends of Huntingdon,
    Or Robin Hood, by whatsoever name
    You best may love him.

    CRIES

                            Robin! Robin! Robin!

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD._]

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, so be it! Myself I am right glad
    To call him at this bright betrothal feast
    My son.

    [_Lays a hand on ROBIN'S shoulder._]

                  Yet, though I would not cast a cloud
    Across our happy gathering, you'll forgive
    An old man and a father if he sees
    All your glad faces thro' a summer mist
    Of sadness.

    ROBIN

                Sadness? Yes, I understand.

    FITZWALTER

    No, Robin, no, you cannot understand.

    ROBIN

                                        Where's Marian?

    FITZWALTER

    Ay, that's all you think of, boy.
    But I must say a word to all of you
    Before she comes.

    ROBIN

                   Why--what?...

    FITZWALTER

                                    No need to look
    So startled; but it is no secret here;
    For many of you are sharers of his wild
    Adventures. Now I hoped an end had come
    To these, until another rumour reached me,
    This very day, of yet another prank.
    You know, you know, how perilous a road
    My Marian must ride if Huntingdon
    Tramples the forest-laws beneath his heel
    And, in the thin disguise of Robin Hood,
    Succours the Saxon outlaws, makes his house
    A refuge for them, lavishes his wealth
    To feed their sick and needy.

    [_The SHERIFF and two of his men appear in the great doorway
    out of sight of the guests._]

    SHERIFF

    [_Whispering._]

                                Not yet! keep back!
    One of you go--see that the guards are set!
    He must not slip us.

    FITZWALTER

                            Oh, I know his heart
    Is gold, but this is not an age of gold;
    And those who have must keep, or lose the power
    Even to help themselves. No--he must doff
    His green disguise of Robin Hood for ever,
    And wear his natural coat of Huntingdon.

    ROBIN

    Ah, which is the disguise? Day after day
    We rise and put our social armour on,
    A different mask for every friend; but steel
    Always to case our hearts. We are all so wrapped,
    So swathed, so muffled in habitual thought
    That now I swear we do not know our souls
    Or bodies from their winding-sheets; but Custom,
    Custom, the great god Custom, all day long
    Shovels the dirt upon us where we lie
    Buried alive and dreaming that we stand
    Upright and royal. Sir, I have great doubts
    About this world, doubts if we have the right
    To sit down here for this betrothal feast
    And gorge ourselves with plenty, when we know
    That for the scraps and crumbs which we let fall
    And never miss, children would kiss our hands
    And women weep in gratitude. Suppose
    A man fell wounded at your gates, you'd not
    Pass on and smile and leave him there to die.
    And can a few short miles of distance blind you?
    Miles, nay, a furlong is enough to close
    The gates of mercy. Must we thrust our hands
    Into the wounds before we can believe?
    Oh, is our sight so thick and gross? We came,
    We saw, we conquered with the Conqueror.
    We gave ourselves broad lands; and when our king
    Desired a wider hunting ground we set
    Hundreds of Saxon homes a-blaze and tossed
    Women and children back into the fire
    If they but wrung their hands against our will.
    And so we made our forest, and its leaves
    Were pitiful, more pitiful than man.
    They gave our homeless victims the same refuge
    And happy hiding place they give the birds
    And foxes. Then we made our forest-laws,
    And he that dared to hunt, even for food,
    Even on the ground where we had burned his hut,
    The ground we had drenched with his own kindred's blood,
    Poor foolish churl, why, we put out his eyes
    With red-hot irons, cut off both his hands,
    Torture him with such horrors that ... Christ God,
    How can I help but fight against it all?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Ah, gossips, if the Conqueror had but burned
    Everything with four walls, hut, castle, palace,
    And turned the whole wide world into a forest,
    Drenched us with may, we might be happy then!
    With sweet blue wood-smoke curling thro' the boughs,
    And just a pigeon's flap to break the silence,
    And ferns, of course, there's much to make men happy.
    Well, well, the forest conquers at the last!
    I saw a thistle in the castle courtyard,
    A purple thistle breaking thro' the pavement,
    Yesterday; and it's wonderful how soon
    Some creepers pick these old grey walls to pieces.
    These nunneries and these monasteries now,
    They don't spring up like flowers, so I suppose
    Old mother Nature wins the race at last.

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, my heart is with you, but I know
    A hundred ages will not change this earth.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_With a candle in his hand._]

    Gossip, suppose the sun goes out like this.
    Pouf!

    [_Blows it out._]

          Stranger things have happened.

    FITZWALTER

                                        Silence, fool!...
    So, if you share your wealth with all the world
    Earth will be none the better, and my poor girl
    Will suffer for it. Where you got the gold
    You have already lavished on the poor
    Heaven knows.

    FRIAR TUCK

                       Oh, by the mass and the sweet moon
    Of Sherwood, so do I? That's none so hard
    A riddle!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                       Ah, Friar Tuck, we know, we know!
    Under the hawthorn bough, and at the foot
    Of rainbows, that's where fairies hide their gold.
    Cut me a silver penny out of the moon
    Next time you're there.

    [_Whispers._]

                            Now tell me, have you brought
    Your quarter-staff?

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_Whispering._]

                         Hush! hush.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                      Oh, mum's the word!
    I see it!

    FITZWALTER

                        Believe me, Robin, there's one way
    And only one--patience! When Lion-Heart
    Comes home from the Crusade, he will not brook
    This blot upon our chivalry. Prince John
    Is dangerous to a heart like yours. Beware
    Of rousing him. Meanwhile, your troth holds good;
    But, till the King comes home from the Crusade
    You must not claim your bride.

    ROBIN

                                    So be it, then....
    When the great King comes home from the Crusade!...

    FITZWALTER

    Meanwhile for Marian's sake and mine, I pray
    Do nothing rash.

    [_Enter WIDOW SCARLET. She goes up to ROBIN HOOD._]

    WIDOW SCARLET

                    Are you that Robin Hood
    They call the poor man's friend?

    ROBIN

                                    I am.

    WIDOW SCARLET

                                            They told me,
    They told me I should find you here. They told me!

    ROBIN

    Come, mother, what's the trouble?

    WIDOW SCARLET

                                    Sir, my son
    Will Scarlet lies in gaol at Nottingham
    For killing deer in Sherwood! Sir, they'll hang him.
    He only wanted food for him and me!
    They'll kill him, I tell you, they'll kill him. I can't help
    Crying it out. He's all I have, all! Save him!
    I'll pray for you, I'll ...

    ROBIN

    [_To FITZWALTER, as he raises WIDOW SCARLET gently to her
    feet._]

                                  Sir, has not the King
    Come home from the Crusade? Does not your heart
    Fling open wide its gates to welcome him?

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, you set me riddles. Follow your conscience.
    Do what seems best.

    ROBIN

                          I hope there is a way,
    Mother. I knew Will Scarlet. Better heart
    There never beat beneath a leather jerkin.
    He loved the forest and the forest loves him;
    And if the lads that wear the forest's livery
    Of living green should happen to break out
    And save Will Scarlet (as on my soul I swear,
    Mother, they shall!) why, that's a matter none
    Shall answer for to prince, or king, or God,
    But you and Robin Hood; and if the judgment
    Strike harder upon us than the heavenly smile
    Of sunshine thro' the greenwood, may it fall
    Upon my head alone.

    [_Enter the SHERIFF, with two of his men._]

    SHERIFF

    [_Reads._]

                            In the King's name!
    Thou, Earl of Huntingdon, by virtue of this writ art hereby
    attainted and deprived of thine earldom, thy lands and all thy
    goods and chattels whatsoever and whereas thou hast at divers
    times trespassed against the officers of the king by force of
    arms, thou art hereby outlawed and banished the realm.

    ROBIN

    That's well.

    [_He laughs._]

                    It puts an end to the great question
    Of how I shall dispose my wealth, Fitzwalter.
    But "banished"?--No! that is beyond their power
    While I have power to breathe, unless they banish
    The kind old oaks of Sherwood. They may call it
    "Outlawed," perhaps.

    FITZWALTER

                            Who let the villain in
    Thro' doors of mine?

    CRIES

                    Out with him! Out with him!

    [_The guests draw swords and the SHERIFF retreats thro' the doorway
    with his men._]

    ROBIN

                                                  Stop!
    Put up your swords! He had his work to do.

    [_WIDOW SCARLET falls sobbing at his feet._]

    WIDOW SCARLET

    O master, master, who will save my son,
    My son?

    ROBIN

    [_Raising her._]

            Why, mother, this is but a dream,
    This poor fantastic strutting show of law!
    And you shall wake with us in Sherwood Forest
    And find Will Scarlet in your arms again.
    Come, cheerly, cheerly, we shall overcome
    All this. Hark!

    [_A bugle sounds in the distance. There is a scuffle in the doorway
    and LITTLE JOHN bursts in with his head bleeding._]

    LITTLE JOHN

               Master, master, come away!
    They are setting a trap for thee, drawing their lines
    All round the castle.

    ROBIN

              How now, Little John,
    They have wounded thee! Art hurt?

    LITTLE JOHN

               No, no, that's nothing.
    Only a bloody cockscomb. Come, be swift,
    Or, if thou wert a fox, thou'dst never slip
    Between 'em. Ah, hear that?

    [_Another bugle sounds from another direction._]

               That's number two.
    Two sides cut off already. When the third
    Sounds--they will have thee, sure as eggs is eggs.
    Prince John is there, Fitzwalter cannot save 'ee.
    They'll burn the castle down.

    ROBIN

                                Prince John is there?

    LITTLE JOHN

    Ay, and my lord Fitzwalter had best look
    Well to my mistress Marian, if these ears
    Heard right as I came creeping thro' their lines.
    Look well to her, my lord, look well to her.
    Come, master, come, for God's sake, come away.

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, this is thy rashness. I warned thee, boy!
    Prince John! Nay, that's too perilous a jest
    For even a prince to play with me. Come, Robin,
    You must away and quickly.

    ROBIN

                              Let me have
    One word with Marian.

    LITTLE JOHN

                              It would be the last
    On earth. Come, if you ever wish to see
    Her face again.

    FITZWALTER

                    Come, Robin, are you mad?
    You'll bring us all to ruin!

    [_He opens a little door in the wall._]

                                The secret passage,
    This brings you out by Much the Miller's wheel,
    Thro' an otter's burrow in the river bank.
    Come, quick, or you'll destroy us! Take this lanthorn.
    If you're in danger, slip into the stream
    And let it carry you down into the heart
    Of Sherwood. Come now, quickly, you must go!

    ROBIN

    The old cave, lads, in Sherwood, you know where
    To find me. Friar Tuck, bring Widow Scarlet
    Thither to-morrow, with a word or two
    From Lady Marian!

    FITZWALTER

                        Quickly, quickly, go.

    [_He pushes ROBIN and LITTLE JOHN into the opening and shuts
    the door. A pause._]

    Oh, I shall pay for this, this cursed folly!
    Henceforth I swear I wash my hands of him!

    [_Enter MARIAN, from a door on the right above the banqueting
    hall. She pauses, pale and frightened, on the broad
    steps leading down._]

    MARIAN

    Father, where's Robin?

    FITZWALTER

                          Child, I bade you stay
    Until I called you.

    MARIAN

                          Something frightened me!
    Father, where's Robin? Where's Robin?

    FITZWALTER

                                        Hush, Marian, hark!

    [_All stand listening._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Stealing to the foot of the stairs and whispering to LADY MARIAN._]

    Lady, they're all so silent now. I'll tell you
    I had a dream last night--there was a man
    That bled to death, because of four grey walls
    And a black-hooded nun.

    FITZWALTER

    [_Angrily._]

                            Hist, Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    [_The third bugle sounds. There is a clamour at the doors.
    Enter PRINCE JOHN and his retainers._]

    JOHN

    [_Mockingly._]

    Now this is fortunate! I come in time
    To see--Oh, what a picture! Lady Marian,
    Forgive me--coming suddenly out of the dark
    And seeing you there, robed in that dazzling white
    Above these verdant gentlemen, I feel
    Like one that greets the gracious evening star
    Thro' a gap in a great wood.
                                  Is aught amiss?
    Why are you all so silent? Ah, my good,
    My brave Fitzwalter, I most fervently
    Trust I am not inopportune.

    FITZWALTER

                                  My lord,
    I am glad that you can jest. I am sadly grieved
    And sorely disappointed in that youth
    Who has incurred your own displeasure.

    JOHN

                                        Ah?
    Your future son-in-law?

    FITZWALTER

                          Never on earth!
    He is outlawed--

    MARIAN

                          Outlawed!

    FITZWALTER

                                    And I wash my hands
    Of Huntingdon. His shadow shall not darken
    My doors again!

    JOHN

                      That's vehement! Ha! ha!
    And what does Lady Marian say?

    MARIAN

                                  My father
    Speaks hastily. I am not so unworthy.

    FITZWALTER

    Unworthy?

    MARIAN

                    Yes, unworthy as to desert him
    Because he is in trouble--the bravest man
    In England since the days of Hereward.
    You know why he is outlawed!

    FITZWALTER

    [_To PRINCE JOHN._]

                                  Sir, she speaks
    As the spoilt child of her old father's dotage.
    Give her no heed. She shall not meet with him
    On earth again, and till she promise this,
    She'll sun herself within the castle garden
    And never cross the draw-bridge.

    MARIAN

                                    Then I'll swim
    The moat!

    FRIAR TUCK

               Ha! ha! well spoken.

    MARIAN

                                    Oh, you forget,
    Father, you quite forget there is a King;
    And, when the King comes home from the Crusade,
    Will you forget Prince John and change once more?

    [_Murmurs of assent from the FORESTERS._]

    JOHN

                                 Enough of this.
    Though I be prince, I am vice-gerent too!
    Fitzwalter, I would have some private talk
    With you and Lady Marian. Bid your guests
    Remove a little--

    FITZWALTER

                            I'll lead them all within!
    And let them make what cheer they may. Come, friends.

    [_He leads them up the stairs to the inner room._]

    My lord, I shall return immediately!

    [_Exeunt FITZWALTER and the guests._]

    JOHN

    Marian!

    MARIAN

            My lord!

    JOHN

    [_Drawing close to her._]

                    I have come to urge a plea
    On your behalf as well as on my own!
    Listen, you may not know it--I must tell you.
    I have watched your beauty growing like a flower,
    With--why should I not say it--worship; yes,
    Marian, I will not hide it.

    MARIAN

                                  Sir, you are mad!
    Sir, and your bride, your bride, not three months wedded!
    You cannot mean ...

    JOHN

                                Listen to me! Ah, Marian,
    You'd be more merciful if you knew all!
    D'you think that princes wed to please themselves?

    MARIAN

    Sir, English maidens do; and I am plighted
    Not to a prince, but to an outlawed man.

    JOHN

               Listen to me! One word! Marian, one word!
    I never meant you harm! Indeed, what harm
    Could come of this? Is not your father poor?
    I'd make him rich! Is not your lover outlawed?
    I'd save him from the certain death that waits him.
    You say the forest-laws afflict your soul
    And his--you say you'd die for their repeal!
    Well--I'll repeal them. All the churls in England
    Shall bless your name and mix it in their prayers
    With heaven itself.

    MARIAN

                          The price?

    JOHN

                                    You call it that!
    To let me lay the world before your feet,
    To let me take this little hand in mine.
    Why should I hide my love from you?

    MARIAN

                                        No more,
    I'll hear no more! You are a prince, you say?

    JOHN

    One word--suppose it some small sacrifice,
    To save those churls for whom you say your heart
    Bleeds; yet you will not lift your little finger
    To save them! And what hinders you?--A breath,
    A dream, a golden rule! Can you not break it
    For a much greater end?

    MARIAN

                            I'd die to save them.

    JOHN

    Then live to save them.

    MARIAN

                              No, you will not let me;
    D'you think that bartering my soul will help
    To save another? If there's no way but this,
    Then through my lips those suffering hundreds cry,
    We choose the suffering. All that is good in them,
    All you have left, all you have not destroyed,
    Cries out against you: and I'll go to them,
    Suffer and toil and love and die with them
    Rather than touch your hand. You over-rate
    Your power to hurt our souls. You are mistaken!
    There is a golden rule!

    JOHN

                              And with such lips
    You take to preaching! I was a fool to worry
    Your soul with reason. With hair like yours--it's hopeless!
    But Marian--you shall hear me.

    [_He catches her in his arms._]

                              Yes, by God,
    Marian, you shall! I love you.

    MARIAN

    [_Struggling._]

                            You should not live!

    JOHN

    One kiss, then! Devil take it.

    [_Enter FITZWALTER above._]

    MARIAN

    [_Wresting herself free._]

                                  You should not live!
    Were I a man and not a helpless girl
    You should not live!

    JOHN

                            Come, now, that's very wicked.
    See how these murderous words affright your father.
    My good Fitzwalter, there's no need to look
    So ghastly. For your sake and hers and mine
    I have been trying to make your girl forget
    The name of Huntingdon. A few short months
    At our gay court would blot his memory out!
    I promise her a life of dazzling pleasures,
    And, in return she flies at me--a tigress--
    Clamouring for my blood! Try to persuade her!

    FITZWALTER

    My lord, you are very good. She must decide
    Herself.

    JOHN

    [_Angrily._]

                  I'll not be trifled with! I hold
    The hand of friendship out and you evade it,
    The moment I am gone, back comes your outlaw.
    You say you have no power with your own child!
    Well, then I'll take her back this very night;
    Back to the court with me. How do I know
    What treasons you are hatching here? I'll take her
    As hostage for yourself.

    FITZWALTER

                            My lord, you jest!
    I have sworn to you.

    JOHN

                            No more! If you be loyal,
    What cause have you to fear?

    FITZWALTER

                              My lord, I'll give
    A hundred other pledges; but not this.

    JOHN

    By heaven, will you dictate your terms to me?
    I say that she shall come back to the court
    This very night! Ho, there, my men.

    [_Enter JOHN'S retainers._]

                                  Escort
    This lady back with us.

    FITZWALTER

    Back there, keep back. Prince or no prince,
    I say she shall not go!

    [_He draws his sword._]

                              I'd rather see her
    Begging in rags with outlawed Huntingdon
    Than that one finger of yours should soil her glove.

    JOHN

    So here's an end of fawning, here's the truth,
    My old white-bearded hypocrite. Come, take her,
    Waste no more time. Let not the old fool daunt you
    With that great skewer.

    FITZWALTER

    [_As JOHN'S men advance._]

                             By God, since you will have it,
    Since you will drive me to my last resort,
    Break down my walls, and hound me to the forest,
    This is the truth! Out of my gates! Ho, help!
    A Robin Hood! A Robin Hood!

    [_There is a clamour from the upper room. The doors are flung
    open and the FORESTERS appear at the head of the steps._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_Coming down into the hall and brandishing his quarter-staff._]

                                              A Robin?
    Who calls on Robin Hood? His men are here
    To answer.

    FITZWALTER

                 Drive these villains out of my gates.

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_To PRINCE JOHN._]

    Sir, I perceive you are a man of wisdom,
    So let me counsel you. There's not a lad
    Up yonder, but at four-score yards can shoot
    A swallow on the wing. They have drunken deep.
    I cannot answer but their hands might loose
    Their shafts before they know it. Now shall I give
    The word? Ready, my lads!

    [_The FORESTERS make ready to shoot. JOHN hesitates for a
    moment._]

    JOHN

                                  My Lady Marian,
    One word, and then I'll take my leave of you!

    [_She pays no heed._]

    Farewell, then! I have five-score men at hand!
    And they shall be but lightning to the hell
    Of my revenge, Fitzwalter. I will not leave
    One stone upon another. From this night's work
    Shall God Himself not save you.

    [_Exeunt JOHN and his men._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_As they go out._]

                                  My Lord Fitzwalter!
    I have confessed him! Shall I bid 'em shoot?
    'Twill save a world of trouble.

    FITZWALTER

                                  No; or the King
    Himself will come against me. Follow them out,
    Drive them out of my gates, then raise the drawbridge
    And let none cross. Oh, I foresaw, foretold!
    Robin has wrecked us all!

    [_Exeunt the FORESTERS and FITZWALTER. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF
    remains alone with MARIAN._]

    MARIAN

    [_She flings herself down on a couch and buries her head in her arms._]

                            O Robin, Robin,
    I cannot lose you now!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Sitting at her feet. The lights grow dim._]

                            Ah, well, the prince
    Promised to break the walls down. Don't you think
    These villains are a sort of ploughshare, lady,
    And where they plough, who knows what wheat may spring!
    The lights are burning low and very low;
    So, Lady Marian, let me tell my dream.
    There was a forester that bled to death
    Because of four grey walls and a black nun
    Whose face I could not see--but, oh, beware!
    Though I am but your fool, your Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    Dancing before the wild winds of the future,
    I feel them thrilling through my tattered wits
    Long ere your wisdom feels them. My poor brain
    Is like a harp hung in a willow-tree
    Swept by the winds of fate. I am but a fool,
    But oh, beware of that black-hooded nun.

    MARIAN

    This is no time for jesting, Shadow-of-a-Leaf.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    The lights are burning low. Do you not feel
    A cold breath on your face?

    MARIAN

                              Fling back that shutter!
    Look out and tell me what is happening.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Flinging back the shutter._]

                                           Look,
    Look, gossip, how the moon comes dancing in.
    Ah, they have driven Prince John across the drawbridge.
    They are raising it, now!

    [_There are cries in the distance, then a heavy sound of chains
    clanking and silence. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF turns from
    the window and stands in the stream of moonlight,
    pointing to the door on the left._]

                              Look! Look!

    MARIAN

    [_Starting up with a cry of fear._]

                                        Ah!

    [_The tall figure of a nun glides into the moonlit hall and throwing
    back her hood reveals the face of QUEEN ELINOR._]

    ELINOR

                                          Lady Marion,
    Tell me quickly, where is Huntingdon hiding?

    MARIAN

    The Queen!

    ELINOR

    Yes! Yes! I donned this uncouth garb
    To pass through your besiegers. If Prince John
    Discover it, all is lost. Come, tell me quickly,
    Where is Robin?

    MARIAN

                    Escaped, I hope.

    ELINOR

                                    Not here?

    MARIAN

    No!

    ELINOR

        Come, dear Lady Marian, do not doubt me.
    I am here to save you both.

    MARIAN

                                He is not here.

    ELINOR

    Ah, but you know where I may find him, Marian.
    All will be lost if you delay to tell me
    Where I may speak with him. He is in peril.
    By dawn Prince John will have five hundred men
    Beleaguering the castle. You are all ruined
    Unless you trust me! Armies will scour the woods
    To hunt him down. Even now he may be wounded,
    Helpless to save himself.

    MARIAN

                              Wounded!

    ELINOR

                                    Dear child,
    Take me to him. Here, on this holy cross,
    My mother's dying gift, I swear to you
    I wish to save him.

    MARIAN

                      Oh, but how?

    ELINOR

                                  Trust me!

    MARIAN

    Wounded! He may be wounded! Oh, if I could,
    I'd go to him! I am helpless, prisoned here.
    My father ...

    ELINOR

              I alone can save your father.
    Give me your word that if I can persuade him,
    You'll lead me to your lover's hiding place,
    And let me speak with him.

    [_Enter FITZWALTER._]

                              Ah, my Lord Fitzwalter!

    FITZWALTER

    The queen! O madam, madam, I am driven
    Beyond myself. This girl, this foolish girl
    Has brought us all to ruin. This Huntingdon,
    As I foresaw, foresaw, foretold, foretold,
    Has dragged me down with him.

    ELINOR

                                I am on your side,
    If you will hear me; and you yet may gain
    A son in Robin Hood.

    FITZWALTER

                              Madam, I swear
    I have done with him. I pray you do not jest;
    But if you'll use your power to save my lands ...
    I was provoked!...
    Prince John required this child here--

    ELINOR

                                        Oh, I know!
    But you'll forgive him that! I do not wonder
    That loveliness like hers--

    FITZWALTER

                              Ay, but you'll pardon
    A father's natural anger. Madam, I swear
    I was indeed provoked. But you'll assure him
    I've washed my hands of Huntingdon.

    MARIAN

                                        And yet
    His men are, even now, guarding your walls!
    Father, you cannot, you shall not--

    FITZWALTER

                                        Oh, be silent!
    Who wrapt me in this tangle? Are you bent
    On driving me out in my old age to seek
    Shelter in caves and woods?

    ELINOR

                                  My good Fitzwalter,
    It has not come to that! If you will trust me
    All will be well; but I must speak a word
    With Robin Hood.

    FITZWALTER

                    You!

    ELINOR

                      Oh, I have a reason.
    Your daughter knows his hiding place.

    FITZWALTER

                                        She knows!

    ELINOR

    Oh, trust them both for that. I am risking much!
    To-morrow she shall guide me there. This bird
    Being flown, trust me to make your peace with John.

    FITZWALTER

    But--Marian!

    ELINOR

                      She'll be safer far with Robin,
    Than loitering here until your roof-tree burns.
    I think you know it. Fitzwalter, I can save you,
    I swear it on this cross.

    FITZWALTER

                            But--Marian! Marian!

    ELINOR

    Your castle wrapt in flame!...
                                   There's nought to fear,
    If she could--Marian, once, at a court masque,
    You wore a page's dress of Lincoln green,
    And a green hood that muffled half your face,
    I could have sworn 'twas Robin come again--
    He was my page, you know--
    Wear it to-morrow--go, child, bid your maid
    Make ready--we'll set out betimes.

    MARIAN

    [_Going up to her father._]

                                      I'll go,
    If you will let me, father. He may be wounded!
    Father, forgive me. Let me go to him.

    ELINOR

    Go, child, first do my bidding. He'll consent
    When you return.

    [_Exit MARIAN._]

                    My dear good friend Fitzwalter,
    Trust me, _I_ have some power with Huntingdon.
    All shall be as you wish. I'll let her guide me,
    But--as for her--she shall not even see him
    Unless you wish. Trust me to wind them all
    Around my little finger.

    FITZWALTER

                            It is dark here.
    Let us within. Madam, I think you are right.
    And you'll persuade Prince John?

    ELINOR

    [_As they go up the steps._]

                                  I swear by this,
    This holy cross, my mother's dying gift!

    FITZWALTER

    It's very sure he'd burn the castle down.

    [_Exeunt._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Coming out into the moonlight and staring up after them._]

    The nun! The nun! They'll whip me if I speak,
    For I am only Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the Fool.

    [_Curtain._]




ACT II


_SCENE I. Sherwood Forest: An open glade, showing on the right the mouth
of the outlaw's cave. It is about sunset. The giant figure of LITTLE
JOHN comes out of the cave, singing._

    LITTLE JOHN

    [_Sings._]


            When Spring comes back to England
              And crowns her brows with may,
            Round the merry moonlit world
              She goes the greenwood way.

    [_He stops and calls in stentorian tones._]

    Much! Much! Much! Where has he vanished now,
    Where has that monstrous giant the miller's son
    Hidden himself?

    [_Enter MUCH, a dwarf-like figure, carrying a large bundle of ferns._]

    MUCH

                    Hush, hush, child, here I am!
    And here's our fairy feather-beds, ha! ha!
    Come, praise me, praise me, for a thoughtful parent.
    There's nothing makes a better bed than ferns
    Either for sleeping sound or rosy dreams.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Take care the fern-seed that the fairies use
    Get not among thy yellow locks, my Titan,
    Or thou'lt wake up invisible. There's none
    Too much of Much already.

    MUCH

    [_Looking up at him impudently._]

                                It would take
    Our big barn full of fern-seed, I misdoubt,
    To make thee walk invisible, Little John,
    My sweet Tom Thumb! And, in this troublous age
    Of forest-laws, if we night-walking minions,
    We gentlemen of the moon, could only hunt
    Invisible, there's many and many of us
    With thumbs lopped off, eyes gutted and legs pruned,
    Slick, like poor pollarded pear-trees, would be lying
    Happy and whole this day beneath the boughs.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Invisible? Ay, but what would Jenny say
    To such a ghostly midge as thou would'st be
    Sipping invisibly at her cherry lips.

    MUCH

    Why, there now, that's a teaser. E'en as it is
    (Don't joke about it) my poor Jenny takes
    The smallness of her Much sorely to heart!
    And though I often tell her half a loaf
    (Ground in our mill) is better than no bread,
    She weeps, poor thing, that an impartial heaven
    Bestows on her so small a crumb of bliss
    As me! You'd scarce believe, now, half the nostrums,
    Possets and strangely nasty herbal juices
    That girl has made me gulp, in the vain hope
    That I, the frog, should swell to an ox like thee.
    I tell her it's all in vain, and she still cheats
    Her fancy and swears I've grown well nigh three feet
    Already. O Lord, she's desperate. She'll advance
    Right inward to the sources of creation,
    She'll take the reins of the world in hand. She'll stop
    The sun like Joshua, turn the moon to blood,
    And if I have to swallow half the herbs
    In Sherwood, I shall stalk a giant yet,
    Shoulder to shoulder with thee, Little John,
    And crack thy head at quarter-staff. But don't,
    Don't joke about it. 'Tis a serious matter.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Into the cave, then, with thy feather-bed.
    Old Much, thy father, waits thee there to make
    A table of green turfs for Robin Hood.
    We shall have guests anon, O merry times,
    Baron and Knight and abbot, all that ride
    Through Sherwood, all shall come and dine with him
    When they have paid their toll! Old Much is there
    Growling at thy delay.

    MUCH

    [_Going towards the cave._]

                          O, my poor father.
    Now, there's a sad thing, too. He is so ashamed
    Of his descendants. Why for some nine years
    He shut his eyes whenever he looked at me;
    And I have seen him on the village green
    Pretend to a stranger, once, who badgered him
    With curious questions, that I was the son
    Of poor old Gaffer Bramble, the lame sexton.
    That self-same afternoon, up comes old Bramble
    White hair a-blaze and big red waggling nose
    All shaking with the palsy; bangs our door
    Clean off its hinges with his crab-tree crutch,
    And stands there--framed--against the sunset sky!
    He stretches out one quivering fore-finger
    At father, like the great Destroying Angel
    In the stained window: straight, the milk boiled over,
    The cat ran, baby squalled and mother screeched.
    Old Bramble asks my father--what--what--what
    He meant--he meant--he meant! You should have seen
    My father's hopeless face! Lord, how he blushed,
    Red as a beet-root! Lord, Lord, how he blushed!
    'Tis a hard business when a parent looks
    Askance upon his offspring.

    [_Exit into the cave._]

    LITTLE JOHN

                              Skip, you chatterer!
    Here comes our master.

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD._]

                            Master, where hast thou been?
    I feared some harm had come to thee. What's this?
    This was a cloth-yard shaft that tore thy coat!

    ROBIN

    Oh, ay, they barked my shoulder, devil take them.
    I got it on the borders of the wood.
    St. Nicholas, my lad, they're on the watch.

    LITTLE JOHN

    What didst thou there? They're on the watch, i' faith!
    A squirrel could not pass them. Why, my namesake
    Prince John would sell his soul to get thy head,
    And both his ears for Lady Marian;
    And whether his ears or soul be worth the more,
    I know not. When the first lark flittered up
    To sing, at dawn, I woke; and thou wast gone.
    What didst thou there?

    ROBIN

                          Well, first I went to swim
    In the deep pool below the mill.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                  I swam
    Enough last night to last me many a day.
    What then?

    ROBIN

              I could not wash away the thought
    Of all you told me. If Prince John should dare!
    That helpless girl! No, no, I will not think it.
    Why, Little John, I went and tried to shoot
    A grey goose wing thro' Lady Marian's casement.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Oh, ay, and a pink nosegay tied beneath it.
    Now, master, you'll forgive your Little John,--
    But that's midsummer madness and the may
    Is only half in flower as yet. But why--
    You are wounded--why are you so pale?

    ROBIN

                                            No--no--
    Not wounded; but oh, my good faithful friend,
    She is not there! I wished to send her warning.
    I could not creep much closer; but I swear
    I think the castle is in the hands of John.
    I saw some men upon the battlements,
    Not hers--I know--not hers!

    LITTLE JOHN

    Hist, who comes here?

    [_He seizes his bow and stands ready to shoot._]

    ROBIN

    Stop, man, it is the fool. Thank God, the fool,
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, my Marian's dainty fool.
    How now, good fool, what news? What news?

    [_Enter SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                    Good fool!
    Should I be bad, sir, if I chanced to bring
    No news at all? That is the wise man's way.
    Thank heaven, I've lost my wits. I am but a leaf
    Dancing upon the wild winds of the world,
    A prophet blown before them. Well, this evening,
    It is that lovely grey wind from the West
    That silvers all the fields and all the seas,
    And I'm the herald of May!

    ROBIN

                              Come, Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    I pray thee, do not jest.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                               I do not jest.
    I am vaunt-courier to a gentleman,
    A sweet slim page in Lincoln green who comes,
    Wood-knife on hip, and wild rose in his face,
    With golden news of Marian. Oh, his news
    Is one crammed honeycomb, swelling with sweetness
    In twenty thousand cells; but delicate!
    So send thy man aside.

    ROBIN

                             Go, Little John.

    [_LITTLE JOHN goes into the cave._]

    Well, Shadow-of-a-Leaf, where is he?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                    At this moment
    His hair is tangled in a rose bush: hark,
    He swears, like a young leopard! Nay, he is free.
    Come, master page, here is that thief of love,
    Give him your message. I'll to Little John.

    [_Exit into the cave. Enter MARIAN, as a page in Lincoln green,
    her face muffled in a hood._]

    ROBIN

    Good even, master page, what is thy news
    Of Lady Marian?

    [_She stands silent._]

                                  Answer me quickly, come,
    Hide not thy face!

    [_She still stands muffled and silent._]

                     Come, boy, the fool is chartered,
    Not thou; and I'll break off this hazel switch
    And make thee dance if thou not answer me.
    What? Silent still? Sirrah, this hazel wand
    Shall lace thee till thou tingle, top to toe.
    I'll ...

    MARIAN

    [_Unmuffling._]

                 Robin!

    ROBIN

    [_Catches her in his arms with a cry._]

                        Marian! Marian!

    MARIAN

                                       Fie upon you,
    Robin, you did not know me.

    ROBIN

    [_Embracing her._]

                                          Oh, you seemed
    Ten thousand miles away. This is not moonlight,
    And I am not Endymion. Could I dream
    My Dian would come wandering through the fern
    Before the sunset? Even that rose your face
    You muffled in its own green leaves.

    MARIAN

                                           But you,
    Were hidden in the heart of Sherwood, Robin,
    Hidden behind a million mighty boughs,
    And yet I found you.

    ROBIN

                      Ay, the young moon stole
    In pity down to her poor shepherd boy;
    But he could never climb the fleecy clouds
    Up to her throne, never could print one kiss
    On her immortal lips. He lay asleep
    Among the poppies and the crags of Latmos,
    And she came down to him, his queen stole down.

    MARIAN

    Oh, Robin, first a rose and then a moon,
    A rose that breaks at a breath and falls to your feet,
    The fickle moon--Oh, hide me from the world;
    For there they say love goes by the same law!
    Let me be outlawed then. I cannot change.
    Sweetheart, sweetheart, Prince John will hunt me down!
    Prince John--Queen Elinor will hunt me down!

    ROBIN

    Queen Elinor! Nay, but tell me what this means?
    How came you here?

    MARIAN

                        The Queen--she came last night,
    Made it an odious kind of praise to me
    That he, not three months wedded to his bride,
    Should--pah!
                     And then she said five hundred men
    Were watching round the borders of the wood;
    But she herself would take me safely through them,
    Said that I should be safer here with Robin,
    She had your name so pat--and I gave way.

    [_Enter QUEEN ELINOR behind. She conceals herself to listen._]

    ROBIN

    Marian, she might have trapped you to Prince John.

    MARIAN

    No; no; I think she wanted me to guide her
    Here to your hiding place. She wished to see you
    Herself, unknown to John, I know not why.
    It was my only way. Her skilful tongue
    Quite won my father over, made him think,
    Poor father, clinging to his lands again,
    He yet might save them. And so, without ado
    (It will be greatly to the joy of Much,
    Your funny little man), I bade my maid
    Jenny, go pack her small belongings up
    This morning, and to follow with Friar Tuck
    And Widow Scarlet. They'll be here anon.

    ROBIN

    Where did you leave the Queen?

    MARIAN

                                  Robin, she tried
    To kill me! We were deep within the wood
    And she began to tell me a wild tale,
    Saying that I reminded her of days
    When Robin was her page, and how you came
    To Court, a breath of April in her life,
    And how you worshipped her, and how she grew
    To love you. But she saw you loved me best
    (So would she mix her gall and lies with honey),
    So she would let you go. And then she tried
    To turn my heart against you, bade me think
    Of all the perils of your outlawry,
    Then flamed with anger when she found my heart
    Steadfast; and when I told her we drew nigh
    The cave, she bade me wait and let her come
    First, here, to speak with you. Some devil's trick
    Gleamed in her smile, the way some women have
    Of smiling with their lips, wreathing the skin
    In pleasant ripples, laughing with their teeth,
    While the cold eyes watch, cruel as a snake's
    That fascinates a bird. I'd not obey her.
    She whipped a dagger out. Had it not been
    For Shadow-of-a-Leaf, who dogged us all the way,
    Poor faithful fool, and leapt out at her hand,
    She would have killed me. Then she darted away
    Like a wild thing into the woods, trying to find
    Your hiding place most like.

    ROBIN

                                  O Marian, why,
    Why did you trust her? Listen, who comes here?

    [_Enter FRIAR TUCK, JENNY and WIDOW SCARLET._]

    Ah, Friar Tuck!

    MARIAN

                   Good Jenny!

    ROBIN

                              And Widow Scarlet!

    FRIAR TUCK

    O children, children, this is thirsty weather!
    The heads I have cracked, the ribs I have thwacked, the bones
    I have bashed with my good quarter-staff, to bring
    These bits of womankind through Sherwood Forest.

    ROBIN

    What, was there scuffling, friar?

    FRIAR TUCK

                                    Some two or three
    Pounced on us, ha! ha! ha!

    JENNY

                               A score at least,
    Mistress, most unchaste ruffians.

    FRIAR TUCK

                                     They've gone home,
    Well chastened by the Church. This pastoral staff
    Mine oaken _Pax Vobiscum_, sent 'em home
    To think about their sins, with watering eyes.
    You never saw a bunch of such blue faces,
    Bumpy and juicy as a bunch of grapes
    Bruised in a Bacchanalian orgy, dripping
    The reddest wine a man could wish to see.

    ROBIN

    I picture it--those big brown hands of thine
    Grape-gathering at their throttles, ha! ha! ha!
    Come, Widow Scarlet, come, look not so sad.

    WIDOW SCARLET

    O master, master, they have named the day
    For killing of my boy.

    ROBIN

                           They have named the day
    For setting of him free, then, my good dame.
    Be not afraid. We shall be there, eh, Friar?
    Grape-gathering, eh?

    FRIAR

                         Thou'lt not be there thyself.
    My son, the game's too dangerous now, methinks.

    ROBIN

    I shall be there myself. The game's too good
    To lose. We'll all be there. You're not afraid,
    Marian, to spend a few short hours alone
    Here in the woods with Jenny.

    MARIAN

                                  Not for myself,
    Robin.

    ROBIN

         We shall want every hand that day,
    And you'll be safe enough. You know we go
    Disguised as gaping yokels, old blind men,
    With patches on their eyes, poor wandering beggars,
    Pedlars with pins and poking-sticks to sell;
    And when the time is come--a merry blast
    Rings out upon a bugle and suddenly
    The Sheriff is aware that Sherwood Forest
    Has thrust its green boughs up beneath his feet.
    Off go the cloaks and all is Lincoln green,
    Great thwacking clubs and twanging bows of yew.
    Oh, we break up like nature thro' the laws
    Of that dark world; and then, good Widow Scarlet,
    Back to the cave we come and your good Will
    Winds his big arm about you once again.
    Go, Friar, take her in and make her cosy.
    Jenny, your Much will grow three feet at least
    With joy to welcome you. He is in the cave.

    [_FRIAR TUCK and WIDOW SCARLET go towards the cave._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    Now for a good bowse at a drinking can.
    I've got one cooling in the cave, unless
    That rascal, Little John, has drunk it all.

    [_Exeunt into cave._]

    JENNY

    [_To MARIAN._]

    Mistress, I haven't spoke a word to you
    For nigh three hours. 'Tis most unkind, I think.

    MARIAN

    Go, little tyrant, and be kind to Much.

    JENNY

    Mistress, it isn't Much I want. Don't think
    Jenny comes trapesing through these awful woods
    For Much. I haven't spoke a word with you
    For nigh three hours. 'Tis most unkind, I think.

    MARIAN

    Wait, Jenny, then, I'll come and talk with you.
    Robin, she is a tyrant; but she loves me.
    And if I do not go, she'll pout and sulk
    Three days on end. But she's a wondrous girl.
    She'd work until she dropped for me. Poor Jenny!

    ROBIN

    That's a quaint tyranny. Go, dear Marian, go;
    But not for long. We have so much to say.
    Come quickly back.

    [_Exit MARIAN. ROBIN paces thoughtfully across the glade._

    _QUEEN ELINOR steals out of her hiding place and
    stands before him._]

                     You here!

    ELINOR

                              Robin, can you
    Believe that girl? Am I so treacherous?

    ROBIN

    It seems you have heard whate'er I had to say.

    ELINOR

    Surely you cannot quite forget those days
    When you were kind to me. Do you remember
    The sunset through that oriel?

    ROBIN

                                      Ay, a god
    Grinning thro' a horse-collar at a pitiful page,
    Dazed with the first red gleam of what he thought
    Life, as the trouveres find it! I am ashamed,
    Remembering how your quick tears blinded me!


    ELINOR

    Ashamed! You--you--that in my bitter grief
    When Rosamund--

    ROBIN

                        I know! I thought your woes,
    Those tawdry relics of your treacheries,
    Wrongs quite unparalleled. I would have fought
    Roland himself to prove you spotless then.

    ELINOR

    Oh, you speak thus to me! Robin, beware!
    I have come to you, I have trampled on my pride,
    Set all on this one cast! If you should now
    Reject me, humble me to the dust before
    That girl, beware! I never forget, I warn you;
    I never forgive.

    ROBIN

                          Are you so proud of that?

    ELINOR

    Ah, well, forgive me, Robin. I'll save you yet
    From all these troubles of your outlawry!
    Trust me--for I can wind my poor Prince John
    Around my little finger. Who knows--with me
    To help you--there are but my two sons' lives
    That greatly hinder it--why, yourself might reign
    Upon the throne of England.

    ROBIN

                              Are you so wrapped
    In treacheries, helplessly false, even to yourself,
    That now you do not know falsehood from truth,
    Darkness from light?

    ELINOR

                              O Robin, I was true
    At least to you. If I were false to others,
    At least I--

    ROBIN

                          No--not that--that sickening plea
    Of truth in treachery. Treachery cannot live
    With truth. The soul wherein they are wedded dies
    Of leprosy.

    ELINOR

    [_Coming closer to him._]

                            Have you no pity, Robin,
    No kinder word than this for the poor creature
    That crept--Ah, feel my heart, feel how it beats!
    No pity?

    ROBIN

          Five years ago this might have moved me!

    ELINOR

    No pity?

    ROBIN

                    None. There is no more to say.
    My men shall guide you safely through the wood.

    ELINOR

    I never forgive!

    [_Enter MARIAN from the cave; she stands silent and startled._]

    ROBIN

                    My men shall guide you back.

    [_Calls._]

    Ho, there, my lads!

    [_Enter several of the OUTLAWS._]

                        This lady needs a guide
    Back thro' the wood.

    ELINOR

    Good-bye, then, Robin, and good-bye to you,
    Sweet mistress! You have wronged me! What of that?
    For--when we meet--Come, lead on, foresters!

    [_Exeunt the QUEEN and her guides._]

    MARIAN

    O Robin, Robin, how the clouds begin
    To gather--how that woman seems to have brought
    A nightmare on these woods.

    ROBIN

                                  Forget it all!
    She is so tangled in those lies the world
    Draws round some men and women, none can help her.
    Marian, for God's sake, let us quite forget
    That nightmare! Oh, that perfect brow of yours,
    Those perfect eyes, pure as the violet wells
    That only mirror heaven and are not dimmed
    Except by clouds that drift thro' heaven and catch
    God's glory in the sunset and the dawn.

    MARIAN

    It is enough for them simply to speak
    The love they hold for you. But--I still fear.
    Robin--think you--she might have overheard
    Your plan--the rescue of Will Scarlet?

    ROBIN

                                              Why--
    No--No--some time had passed, and yet--she seemed
    To have heard your charge against her! No, she guessed it.
    Come--let us brush these cobwebs from our minds.
    Look how the first white star begins to tremble
    Like a big blossom in that sycamore.
    Now you shall hear our forest ritual.
    Ho, Little John! Summon the lads together!

    [_The OUTLAWS come out of the cave. LITTLE JOHN blows a bugle
    and others come in from the forest._]

    Friar, read us the rules.

    FRIAR TUCK

                                  First, shall no man
    Presume to call our Robin Hood or any
    By name of Earl, lord, baron, knight or squire,
    But simply by their names as men and brothers:
    Second, that Lady Marian while she shares
    Our outlaw life in Sherwood shall be called
    Simply Maid Marian. Thirdly, we that follow
    Robin, shall never in thought or word or deed
    Do harm to widow, wife or maid; but hold,
    Each, for his mother's or sister's or sweetheart's sake,
    The glory of womanhood, a sacred thing,
    A star twixt earth and heaven. Fourth, whomsoever
    Ye meet in Sherwood ye shall bring to dine
    With Robin, saving carriers, posts and folk
    That ride with food to serve the market towns
    Or any, indeed, that serve their fellow men.
    Fifth, you shall never do the poor man wrong,
    Nor spare a priest or usurer. You shall take
    The waste wealth of the rich to help the poor,
    The baron's gold to stock the widow's cupboard,
    The naked ye shall clothe, the hungry feed,
    And lastly shall defend with all your power
    All that are trampled under by the world,
    The old, the sick and all men in distress.

    ROBIN

    So, if it be no dream, we shall at last
    Hasten the kingdom of God's will on earth.
    There shall be no more talk of rich and poor,
    Norman and Saxon. We shall be one people,
    One family, clustering all with happy hands
    And faces round that glowing hearth, the sun.
    Now let the bugle sound a golden challenge
    To the great world. Greenleaf, a forest call!

    [_REYNOLD GREENLEAF blows a resounding call._]

    Now let the guards be set; and then, to sleep!
    To-morrow there'll be work enough for all.
    The hut for Jenny and Maid Marian!
    Come, you shall see how what we lack in halls
    We find in bowers. Look how from every branch
    Such tapestries as kings could never buy
    Wave in the starlight. You'll be waked at dawn
    By feathered choirs whose notes were taught in heaven.

    MUCH

    Come, Jenny, come, we must prepare the hut
    For Mistress Marian. Here's a bundle of ferns!

    [_They go into the hut. The light is growing dimmer and richer._]

    LITTLE JOHN

    And here's a red cramoisy cloak, a baron

    [_Handing them in at the door._]

    Dropt, as he fled one night from Robin Hood;
    And here's a green, and here's a midnight blue,
    All soft as down. But wait, I'll get you more.

    [_Two of the Outlaws appear at the door with deerskins. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF
    stands behind them with a great bunch of
    flowers and ferns._]

    FIRST OUTLAW

    Here's fawn-skins, milder than a maiden's cheek.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Oh, you should talk in rhyme! The world should sing
    Just for this once in tune, if Love were king!

    SECOND OUTLAW

    Here's deer-skins, for a carpet, smooth and meek.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    I knew you would! Ha! ha! Now look at what I bring!

    [_He throws flowers into the hut, spray by spray, speaking in a
    kind of ecstasy._]

    Here's lavender and love and sweet wild thyme,
    And dreams and blue-bells that the fairies chime,
    Here's meadow-sweet and moonlight, bound in posies,
    With ragged robin, traveller's joy and roses,
    And here--just three leaves from a weeping willow;
    And here--that's best--deep poppies for your pillow.

    MUCH

    And here's a pillow that I made myself,
    Stuffed with dry rose-leaves and grey pigeon's down,
    The softest thing on earth except my heart!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Going aside and throwing himself down among the ferns to watch._]

    Just three sweet breaths and then the song is flown!

    [_MUCH looks at him for a moment with a puzzled face, then turns to the hut
    again._]

    MUCH

    Jenny, here, take it--though I'm fond of comforts,
    Take it and give it to Maid Marian.

    JENNY

    Why, Much, 'tis bigger than thyself.

    MUCH

                                      Hush, child.
    I meant to use it lengthways. 'Twould have made
    A feather-bed complete for your poor Much,
    Take it!

    [_The OUTLAWS all go into the cave._]

    MARIAN

            O Robin, what a fairy palace!
    How cold and grey the walls of castles seem
    Beside your forest's fragrant halls and bowers.
    I do not think that I shall be afraid
    To sleep this night, as I have often been
    Beneath our square bleak battlements.

    ROBIN

                                        And look,
    Between the boughs, there is your guard, all night,
    That great white star, white as an angel's wings,
    White as the star that shone on Bethlehem!
    Good-night, sweetheart, good-night!

    MARIAN

                                      Good-night!

    ROBIN

                                                One kiss!
    Oh, clear bright eyes, dear heavens of sweeter stars,
    Where angels play, and your own sweeter soul
    Smiles like a child into the face of God,
    Good-night! Good-night!

    [_MARIAN goes into the hut. The door is shut. ROBIN goes to
    the mouth of the cave and throws himself down on a
    couch of deerskins. The light grows dimly rich and
    fairy-like._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Rising to his knees._]

                                 Here comes the little cloud!

    [_A little moonlit cloud comes floating down between the tree-tops
    into the glade. TITANIA is seen reposing upon it. She
    steps to earth. The cloud melts away._]

    How blows the wind from fairyland, Titania?

    TITANIA

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the wicked queen has heard
    Your master's plan for saving poor Will Scarlet.
    She knows Maid Marian will be left alone,
    Unguarded in these woods. The wicked Prince
    Will steal upon her loneliness. He plots
    To carry her away.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                          What can we do?
    Can I not break my fairy vows and tell?

    TITANIA

                  No, no; you cannot, even if you would,
    Convey our fairy lore to mortal ears.
    When have they heard our honeysuckle bugles
    Blowing reveille to the crimson dawn?
    We can but speak by dreams; and, if you spoke,
    They'd whip you, for your words would all ring false
    Like sweet bells out of tune.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                  What can we do?

    TITANIA

    Nothing, except on pain of death, to stay
    The course of Time and Tide. There's Oberon!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Oberon!

    TITANIA

                 He can tell you more than I.

    [_Enter OBERON._]

    OBERON

    Where's Orchis? Where's our fairy trumpeter
    To call the court together?

    ORCHIS

                                Here, my liege.

    OBERON

    Bugle them hither; let thy red cheeks puff
    Until thy curled petallic trumpet thrill
    More loudly than a yellow-banded bee
    Thro' all the clover clumps and boughs of thyme.
    They are scattered far abroad.

    ORCHIS

                                  My liege, it shall
    Outroar the very wasp!

    [_Exit._]

    OBERON

    [_As he speaks, the fairies come flocking from all sides into the
    glade._]

                            Methinks they grow
    Too fond of feasting. As I passed this way
    I saw the fairy halls of hollowed oaks
    All lighted with their pale green glow-worm lamps.
    And under great festoons of maiden-hair
    Their brilliant mushroom tables groaned with food.
    Hundreds of rose-winged fairies banqueted!
    All Sherwood glittered with their prismy goblets
    Brimming the thrice refined and luscious dew
    Not only of our own most purplest violets,
    But of strange fragrance, wild exotic nectars,
    Drawn from the fairy blossoms of some star
    Beyond our tree-tops! Ay, beyond that moon
    Which is our natural limit--the big lamp
    Heaven lights upon our boundary.

    ORCHIS

                                    Mighty King,
    The Court is all attendant on thy word.

    OBERON

    [_With great dignity._]

    Elves, pixies, nixies, gnomes and leprechauns,

    [_He pauses._]

    We are met, this moonlight, for momentous councils
    Concerning those two drowsy human lovers,
    Maid Marian and her outlawed Robin Hood.
    They are in dire peril; yet we may not break
    Our vows of silence. Many a time
    Has Robin Hood by kindly words and deeds
    Done in his human world, sent a new breath
    Of life and joy like Spring to fairyland;
    And at the moth-hour of this very dew-fall,
    He saved a fairy, whom he thought, poor soul,
    Only a may-fly in a spider's web,
    He saved her from the clutches of that Wizard,
    That Cruel Thing, that dark old Mystery,
    Whom ye all know and shrink from--

    [_Exclamations of horror from the fairies._]

                                      Plucked her forth,
    So gently that not one bright rainbow gleam
    Upon her wings was clouded, not one flake
    Of bloom brushed off--there lies the broken web.
    Go, look at it; and here is pale Perilla
    To tell you all the tale.

    [_The fairies cluster to look at the web, etc._]

    A FAIRY

                             Can we not make them free
    Of fairyland, like Shadow-of-a-Leaf, to come
    And go, at will, upon the wings of dreams?

    OBERON

    Not till they lose their wits like Shadow-of-a-Leaf.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Can I not break my fairy vows and tell?

    OBERON

    Only on pain of what we fairies call
    Death!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

          Death?

    OBERON

                  Never to join our happy revels,
    Never to pass the gates of fairyland
    Again, but die like mortals. What that means
    We do not know--who knows?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                If I could save them!--
    I am only Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    OBERON

                                There is a King
    Beyond the seas. If he came home in time,
    All might be well. We fairies only catch
    Stray gleams, wandering shadows of things to come.

    TITANIA

    Oh, if the King came home from the Crusade!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Why will he fight for graves beyond the sea?

    OBERON

    Our elfin couriers brought the news at dusk
    That Lion-Heart, while wandering home thro' Europe,
    In jet-black armour, like an errant knight,
    Despite the great red cross upon his shield,
    Was captured by some wicked prince and thrust
    Into a dungeon. Only a song, they say,
    Can break those prison-bars. There is a minstrel
    That loves his King. If he should roam the world
    Singing until from that dark tower he hears
    The King reply, the King would be set free.

    TITANIA

    Only a song, only a minstrel?

    OBERON

                                Ay;
    And Blondel is his name.

    [_A long, low sound of wailing is heard in the distance. The
    fairies shudder and creep together._]

    TITANIA

                            Hark, what is that?

    OBERON

    The cry of the poor, the cry of the oppressed,
    The sound of women weeping for their children,
    The victims of the forest laws. The moan
    Of that dark world where mortals live and die
    Sweeps like an icy wind thro' fairyland.
    And oh, it may grow bitterer yet, that sound!
    'Twas Merlin's darkest prophecy that earth
    Should all be wrapped in smoke and fire, the woods
    Hewn down, the flowers discoloured and the sun
    Begrimed, until the rows of lifeless trees
    Against the greasy sunset seemed no more
    Than sooty smudges of an ogre's thumbs
    Upon the sweating forehead of a slave.
    While, all night long, fed with the souls of men,
    And bodies, too, great forges blast and burn
    Till the great ogre's cauldrons brim with gold.

    [_The wailing sound is heard again in the distance._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                      To be shut out for ever, only to hear
    Those cries! I am only Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the fool,
    I cannot face it! Is there no hope but this?
    No hope for Robin and Maid Marian?

    OBERON

    If the great King comes home from the Crusade
    In time! If not,--there is another King
    Beyond the world, they say.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                  Death, that dark death!
    To leave the sunlight and the flowers for ever!
    I cannot bear it! Oh, I cannot tell them.
    I'll wait--perhaps the great King will come home,
    If not--Oh, hark, a wandering minstrel's voice?

    OBERON

    Who is drawing hither? Listen, fairies, listen!

    [_Song heard approaching thro' the wood._]

              Knight on the narrow way,
                Where wouldst thou ride?
              "Onward," I heard him say,
                "Love, to thy side!"

              "Nay," sang a bird above;
                "Stay, for I see
              Death in the mask of love,
                Waiting for thee."

    [_The song breaks off. Enter a MINSTREL, leading a great white
    steed. He pauses, confronted by the fairy host. The
    moonlight dazzles him._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Minstrel, art thou, too, free of fairyland?
    Where wouldst thou ride? What is thy name?

    MINSTREL

                                                My name
    Is Blondel.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

              Blondel!

    THE FAIRIES

                      Blondel!

    MINSTREL

                                And I ride
    Through all the world to seek and find my King!

    [_He passes through the fairy host and goes into the woods on the
    further side of the glade, continuing his song, which
    dies away in the distance._]

                       [_Song._]
                "Death? What is death?" he cried.
                  "I must ride on,
                On to my true love's side,
                  Up to her throne!"

                       [_Curtain._]




ACT III


SCENE I. _May-day. An open place (near NOTTINGHAM). A crowd of rustics
and townsfolk assembling to see the execution of WILL SCARLET._

    FIRST RUSTIC

    A sad may-day! Where yonder gallows glowers,
    We should have raised the may-pole.

    SECOND RUSTIC

                                      Ay, no songs,
    No kisses in the ring, no country dances
    To-day; no lads and lasses on the green,
    Crowning their queen of may.

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD, disguised as an old beggar, with a green
    patch on one eye._]

    ROBIN

                                  Is this the place,
    Masters, where they're a-goin' to hang Will Scarlet?

    FIRST RUSTIC

    Ay, father, more's the pity.

    ROBIN

                                Eh! Don't ye think
    There may be scuffling, masters? There's a many
    That seems to like him well, here, roundabouts.

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Too many halberts round him. There's no chance.

    ROBIN

    I've heard the forest might break out, the lads
    In Lincoln green, you wot of! If they did?

    FIRST RUSTIC

    There's many here would swing a cudgel and help
    To trip the Sheriff up. If Robin Hood
    Were only here! But then he's outlawed now.

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ay, and there's big rewards out. It would be
    Sure death for him to try a rescue now.
    The biggest patch of Lincoln Green we'll see
    This day, is that same patch on thy old eye,
    Eh, lads!

    THIRD RUSTIC

                  What's more, they say Prince John is out
    This very day, scouring thro' Sherwood forest
    In quest of Lady Marian!

    ROBIN

    [_Sharply._]

                              You heard that?

    THIRD RUSTIC

    Ay, for they say she's flown to Sherwood forest.

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ah! Ah? That's why he went. I saw Prince John!
    With these same eyes I saw him riding out
    To Sherwood, not an hour ago.

    ROBIN

                                  You saw him?

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ay, and he only took three men at arms.

    FIRST RUSTIC

    Three men at arms! Why then, he must ha' known
    That Robin's men would all be busy here!
    He's none so bold, he would not risk his skin!
    I think there'll be some scuffling after all.

    ROBIN

    Ay, tell 'em so--go, spread it thro' the crowd!

                        [_He mutters to himself._]

    He'd take some time, to find her, but 'fore God
    We must be quick; 'fore God we must be quick!

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Why, father, one would never think to see thee
    Thou had'st so sound a heart!

    FIRST RUSTIC

                                  Ah, here they come!
    The Sheriff and his men; and, in the midst,
    There's poor Will Scarlet bound.

    THE CROWD MURMURS

                                    Ah, here they come!
    Look at the halberts shining! Can you see him?

    FIRST RUSTIC

    There, there he is. His face is white: but, Lord,
    He takes it bravely.

    SECOND RUSTIC

                        He's a brave man, Will.

    SHERIFF

    Back with the crowd there, guards; delay no time!

    SOME WOMEN IN THE CROWD

    Ah, ah, poor lad!

    ROBIN

    [_Eagerly._]

                    What are they doing now?
    I cannot see!

    FIRST RUSTIC

                 The Sheriff's angered now!

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ay, for they say a messenger has come
    From that same godless hangman whose lean neck
    I'd like to twist, saying he is delayed.
    'Tis the first godly deed he has ever done.

    THIRD RUSTIC

    The Sheriff says he will not be delayed.
    But who will take the hangman's office?

    ROBIN

                                            Masters,
    I have a thought; make way; let me bespeak
    The Sheriff!

    RUSTICS

                  How now, father, what's to do?

    ROBIN

    Make way, I tell you. Here's the man they want!

    SHERIFF

    What's this?

    ROBIN

                  Good master Sheriff, I've a grudge
    Against Will Scarlet. Let me have the task
    Of sending him to heaven!

    CROWD

                              Ah-h-h, the old devil!

    SHERIFF

    Come on, then, and be brief!

    ROBIN

                                I'm not a hangman;
    But I can cleave your thinnest hazel wand
    At sixty yards.

    SHERIFF

                            Shoot, then, and make an end.
    Make way there, clear the way!

    [_An opening is made in the crowd. ROBIN stands in the gap,
    WILL SCARLET is not seen by the audience._]


    CROWD

                                    Ah-h-h, the old devil!

    ROBIN

    I'll shoot him one on either side, just graze him,
    To show you how I love him; then the third
    Slick in his heart.

    [_He shoots. A murmur goes up from the crowd. The crowd
    hides WILL SCARLET during the shooting. But ROBIN
    remains in full view, in the opening._]

    SHERIFF

    [_Angrily._]

                               Take care! You've cut the cord
    That bound him on that side!

    ROBIN

                                   Then here's the second!
    I will be careful!

    [_He takes a steady aim._]

    A RUSTIC TO HIS NEIGHBOURS

                               I' faith, lads, he can shoot!
    What do you think--that green patch on his eye
    Smacks of the merry men! He's tricking them!

    [_ROBIN shoots. A louder murmur goes up from the crowd._]

    SHERIFF

    You have cut the rope again!

    A CRY

                                He has cut him free!

    ROBIN

    All right! All right! It's just to tease the dog!
    Here's for the third now!

    [_He aims and shoots quickly. There is a loud cry of a wounded
    man; then a shout from the crowd._]

    THE CROWD

    Ah-h-h, he has missed; he has killed
    One of the guards!

    FIRST RUSTIC

                      What has he done?

    SECOND RUSTIC

                                        He has killed
    One of the Sheriff's men!

    SHERIFF

                              There's treachery here!
    I'll cleave the first man's heart that moves!

    ROBIN

                                                Will Scarlet,
    Pick up that dead man's halbert!

    SHERIFF

                                    Treachery! Help!
    Down with the villain!

    ROBIN

    [_Throws off his beggar's crouch and hurls the SHERIFF and several
    of his men back amongst the crowd. His cloak drops off._]

    Sherwood! A merry Sherwood!

    CROWD

    Ah! ha! The Lincoln Green! A Robin Hood!

    [_A bugle rings out and immediately some of the yokels throw off
    their disguise and the Lincoln green appears as by
    magic amongst the crowd. The guards are rushed and
    hustled by them. Robin and several of his men make
    a ring round WILL SCARLET._]

    SHERIFF

    It is the outlawed Earl of Huntingdon:
    There is a great reward upon his head.
    Down with him!

    [_The SHERIFF'S men make a rush at the little band. A KNIGHT
    in jet black armour, with a red-cross shield, suddenly appears
    and forces his way through the mob, sword in
    hand._]

    KNIGHT

                            What, so many against so few!
    Back, you wild wolves. Now, foresters, follow me,
    For our St. George and merry England, charge,
    Charge them, my lads!

    [_The FORESTERS make a rush with him and the SHERIFF and his
    men take to flight._]

    ROBIN

                             Now back to Sherwood, swiftly!
    A horse, or I shall come too late; a horse!

    [_He sees the KNIGHT in armour standing by his horse._]

    Your pardon, sir; our debt to you is great,
    Too great almost for thanks; but if you be
    Bound by the vows of chivalry, I pray you
    Lend me your charger; and my men will bring you
    To my poor home in Sherwood. There you'll find
    A most abundant gratitude.

    KNIGHT

                                  Your name?

    ROBIN

    Was Huntingdon; but now is Robin Hood.

    KNIGHT

    If I refuse?

    ROBIN

                  Then, sir, I must perforce
    Take it. I am an outlaw, but the law
    Of manhood still constrains me--'tis a matter
    Of life and death--

    KNIGHT

                        Take it and God be with you!
    I'll follow you to Sherwood with your men.

    [_ROBIN seizes the horse, leaps to the saddle, and gallops away._]

    [_Curtain._]


SCENE II. _Sherwood Forest. Outside the cave. JENNY, MARIAN and WIDOW
SCARLET._

    MARIAN

    This dreadful waiting! How I wish that Robin
    Had listened to the rest and stayed with me.
    How still the woods are! Jenny, do you think
    There will be fighting? Oh, I am selfish, mother;
    You need not be afraid. Robin will bring
    Will Scarlet safely back to Sherwood. Why,
    Perhaps they are all returning even now!
    Cheer up! How long d'you think they've been away,
    Jenny, six hours or more? The sun is high,
    And all the dew is gone.

    JENNY

                            Nay, scarce three hours.
    Now don't you keep a-fretting. They'll be back,
    Quite soon enough. I've scarcely spoke with you,
    This last three days and more; and even now
    It seems I cannot get you to myself,
    Two's quite enough.

    [_To WIDOW SCARLET._]


                        Come, widow, come with me.
    I'll give you my own corner in the hut
    And make you cosy. If you take a nap
    Will Scarlet will be here betimes you wake.

    [_Takes her to the hut and shuts her in._]

    There, drat her, for a mumping mumble-crust!

    MARIAN

    Come, Jenny, that's too bad; the poor old dame
    Is lonely.

    JENNY

                She's not lonely when she sleeps,
    And if I never get you to myself
    Where was the good of trapesing after you
    And living here in Sherwood like wild rabbits?
    You ha'nt so much as let me comb your hair
    This last three days and more.

    MARIAN

                                  Well, comb it, Jenny,
    Now, if you like, and comb it all day long;
    But don't get crabbed, and don't speak so crossly!

    [_JENNY begins loosening MARIAN'S hair and combing it._]

    JENNY

    Why, Mistress, it grows longer every day.
    It's far below your knees, and how it shines!
    And wavy, just like Much the Miller's brook,
    Where it comes tumbling out into the sun,
    Like gold, red gold.

    MARIAN

                        Ah, that's provoking, Jenny,
    For you forgot to bring me my steel glass,
    And, if you chatter so, I shall soon want it.

    JENNY

    I've found a very good one at a pinch.
    There's a smooth silver pool, down in the stream,
    Where you can see your face most beautiful.

    MARIAN

    So that's how Jenny spends her lonely hours,
    A sad female Narcissus, while poor Much
    Dwines to an Echo!

    JENNY

                      I don't like those gods.
    I never cared for them. But, as for Much,
    Much is the best of all the merry men.
    And, mistress, O, he speaks so beautifully,
    It _might_ be just an Echo from blue hills
    Far, far away! You see he's quite a scholar:
    Much, more an' most (That's what he calls the three
    Greasy caparisons--much, more an' most)!
    You see they thought that being so very small
    They could not make him grow to be a man,
    They'd make a scholar of him instead. The Friar
    Taught him his letters. He can write his name,
    And mine, and yours, just like a missal book,
    In lovely colours; and he always draws
    The first big letter of JENNY like a tree
    With naked Cupids hiding in the branches.
    Mistress, I don't believe you hear one word
    I ever speak to you! Your eyes are always
    That far and far away.

    MARIAN

                          I'm listening, Jenny!

    JENNY

    Well, when he draws the first big M of yours,
    He makes it like a bridge from earth to heaven,
    With white-winged angels passing up and down;
    And, underneath the bridge, in a black stream,
    He puts the drowning face of the bad Prince
    Holding his wicked hands out, while a devil
    Stands on the bank and with a pointed stake
    Keeps him from landing--
                          Ah, what's that? What's that?

    MARIAN

    O Jenny, how you startled me!

    JENNY

                                 I thought
    I saw that same face peering thro' the ferns
    Yonder--there--see, they are shaking still.

    [_She screams._]

                                                Ah! Ah!

    [_PRINCE JOHN and another man appear advancing across the
    glade._]

    JOHN

    So here's my dainty tigress in her den,
    And--Warman--there's a pretty scrap for you
    Beside her. Now, sweet mistress, will you deign
    To come with me, to change these cheerless woods
    For something queenlier? If I be not mistaken,
    You have had time to tire of that dark cave.
    Was I not right, now? Surely you can see
    Those tresses were not meant to waste their gold
    Upon this desert. Nay, but Marian, hear me.
    I do not jest.

    [_At a sign from MARIAN, JENNY goes quickly inside the cave._]

                 That's well! Dismiss your maid!
    Warman, remove a little.

    [_His man retires._]

                            I see you think
    A little better of me! Out in the wood
    There waits a palfrey for you, and the stirrup
    Longs, as I long, to clasp your dainty foot.
    I am very sure by this you must be tired
    Of outlawry, a lovely maid like you.

    [_He draws nearer._]

    MARIAN

    Wait--I must think, must think.

    JOHN

                                  Give me your hand!
    Why do you shrink from me? If you could know
    The fire that burns me night and day, you would not
    Refuse to let me snatch one cooling kiss
    From that white hand of yours.

    MARIAN

                                  If you be prince,
    You will respect my loneliness and go.

    JOHN

    How can I leave you, when by day and night
    I see that face of yours.
    I'll not pretend
    I do not love you, do not long for you,
    Desire and hunger for your kiss, your touch!
    I'll not pretend to be a saint, you see!
    I hunger and thirst for you. Marian, Marian.

    MARIAN

    You are mad!

    JOHN

                  Ay, mad for you.
    Body and soul
    I am broken up with love for you. Your eyes
    Flash like the eyes of a tigress, and I love them
    The better for it.
    Ah, do not shrink from me!

    [_JENNY comes out of the cave and hands MARIAN a bow. She
    leaps back and aims it at JOHN._]

    MARIAN

    Back, you wild beast, or by the heaven above us,
    I'll kill you! Now, don't doubt me. I can shoot
    Truly as any forester. I swear,
    Prince or no prince, king or no king, I'll kill you
    If you should stir one step from where you stand.

    JOHN

    Come, come, sweet Marian, put that weapon down.
    I was beside myself, was carried away.
    I cannot help my love for--

    MARIAN

                                  I'll not hear
    Another sickening word: throw down your arms,
    That dagger at your side.

    JOHN

                              Oh, that's too foolish,
    Marian, I swear--

    MARIAN

                      You see that rusty stain
    Upon the silver birch down yonder? Watch.

    [_She shoots. Then swiftly aims at him again._]

    Now, throw your weapon down.

    [_He pulls out the dagger and throws it down, with a shrug of his
    shoulders. One of his men steals up behind MARIAN._]

    JENNY

                              Ah, Mistress Marian,
    There's one behind you! Look!

    [_The man springs forward and seizes MARIAN'S arms._]

    JOHN

    [_Coming forward and taking hold of her also._]

                                   So, my sweet tigress,
    You're trapped then, are you? Well, we'll waste no time!
    We'll talk this over when we reach the castle.
    Keep off the maid, there, Warman; I can manage
    This turbulent beauty. Ah, by God, you shall
    Come! Ah? God's blood, what's this?

    [_MARIAN has succeeded in drawing her dagger and slightly wounding
    him. She wrests herself free._]

    MARIAN

                                       Keep back, I warn you!

    JOHN

    [_Advancing slowly._]

    Strike, now strike if you will. You will not like
    To see the red blood spurting up your hand.
    That's not maid's work. Come, strike!

    [_ROBIN HOOD appears at the edge of the glade behind him_]

                                          You see, you cannot!
    Your heart is tenderer than you think.

    ROBIN

    [_Quietly._]

                                          Prince John!

    JOHN

    [_Turns round and confronts ROBIN._]

    Out with your blade, Warman; call up the rest!
    We can strike freely now, without a fear
    Of marring the sweet beauty of the spoil.
    We four can surely make an end of him.
    Have at him, lads, and swiftly, or the thieves
    Will all be down on us.

    [_ROBIN draws his sword and sets his back to an oak. The other
    two followers of PRINCE JOHN come out of the wood._]

    ROBIN

                            Come on, all four!
    This oak will shift its roots before I budge
    One inch from four such howling wolves. Come on;
    You must be tired of fighting women-folk.
    Come on! By God, sir, you must guard your head
    Better than that,

    [_He disarms WARMAN._]

                    Or you're just food for worms
    Already; come, you dogs!

    PRINCE JOHN

                            Work round, you three,
    Behind him! Drive him out from that damned oak!

    ROBIN

    Oh, that's a princely speech! Have at you, sir!

    [_He strikes PRINCE JOHN'S sword out of his hand and turns suddenly
    to confront the others. JOHN picks up a dagger
    and makes as if to stab ROBIN in the back. At the same
    instant, bugles are heard in the distance. The red-cross
    knight flashes between the trees and seizing JOHN'S arm
    in his gauntleted hand, disarms him, then turns to help
    ROBIN._]

    KNIGHT

    What, four on one! Down with your blades, you curs,
    Or, by Mahound!--

    [_The three men take to flight. JOHN stands staring at the newcomer.
    The FORESTERS appear, surrounding the
    glade._]

    JOHN

    [_Muttering._]

                      What? Thou? Thou? Or his ghost?
    No--no--it cannot be.

    ROBIN

                        Let them yelp home,
    The pitiful jackals. They have left behind
    The prime offender. Ha, there, my merry lads,
    All's well; but take this villain into the cave
    And guard him there.

    [_The FORESTERS lead PRINCE JOHN into the cave._]

    JOHN

    [_To the FORESTERS._]

                        Answer me one thing: who
    Is yonder red-cross knight?

    A FORESTER

                              No friend of thine,
    Whoe'er he be!

    KNIGHT

    [_To ROBIN._]

                  I need not ask _his_ name.
    I grieve to know it!

    ROBIN

                        Sir, I am much beholden
    To your good chivalry. What thanks is mine
    To give, is all your own.

    KNIGHT

                                Then I ask this!
    Give me that prisoner! I think his life is mine.

    ROBIN

    You saved my own, and more, you saved much more
    Than my poor life is worth. But, sir, think well!
    This man is dangerous, not to me alone,
    But to the King of England; for he'll yet
    Usurp the throne! Think well!

    KNIGHT

                                  I ask no more.
    I have more reasons than you know.

    ROBIN

                                    So be it.
    Ho! Bring the prisoner back!

    [_The FORESTERS bring PRINCE JOHN back. He stares at
    the KNIGHT as if in fear._]

                                 Sir, you shall judge him.
    This prisoner is your own.

    KNIGHT

                              Then--let him go!

    FORESTERS

    What! Set him free?

    ROBIN

                     Obey!

    [_They release PRINCE JOHN._]

    KNIGHT

                              Out of my sight;
    Go!

    PRINCE JOHN

              What man is this?

    KNIGHT

                              Quickly, get thee gone!

[_PRINCE JOHN goes out, shaken and white._]

    ROBIN

    We'll think no more of him! It is our rule
    That whomsoe'er we meet in merry greenwood
    Should dine with us. Will you not be our guest?

    KNIGHT

    That's a most happy thought! I have not heard
    A merrier word than dinner all this day.
    I am well-nigh starved.

    ROBIN

                          Will you not raise your visor
    And let us know to whose good knightly hand
    We are so beholden?

    KNIGHT

                        Sir, you will pardon me,
    If, for a little, I remain unknown.
    But, tell me, are you not that Robin Hood
    Who breaks the forest laws?

    ROBIN

                                That is my name.
    We hold this earth as naturally our own
    As the glad common air we breathe. We think
    No man, no king, can so usurp the world
    As not to give us room to live free lives,
    But, if you shrink from eating the King's deer--

    KNIGHT

    Shrink? Ha! ha! ha! I count it as my own!

    [_The FORESTERS appear, preparing the dinner on a table of green
    turfs, beneath a spreading oak. MARIAN and JENNY
    appear at the door of the hut. JENNY goes across to help
    at the preparations for dinner._]

    ROBIN

    Ah, there's my Lady Marian! Will you not come
    And speak with her?

    [_He and the KNIGHT go and talk to MARIAN in the background._]

    LITTLE JOHN

                    [_At the table._]
                        The trenchers all are set;
    Manchets of wheat, cream, curds and honey-cakes,
    Venison pasties, roasted pigeons! Much,
    Run to the cave; we'll broach our rarest wine
    To-day. Old Much is waiting for thee there
    To help him. He is growling roundly, too,
    At thy delay.

    MUCH

                    [_Going towards the cave._]

                  Ah me, my poor old father!

    JENNY

    I've dressed the salt and strawed the dining hall
    With flowers.

    [_Enter FRIAR TUCK with several more FORESTERS and WILL
    SCARLET._]

    ROBIN

                  Ah, good Will Scarlet, here at last!

    FRIAR TUCK

    We should ha' been here sooner; but these others
    Borrowed a farmer's market cart and galloped
    Ahead of us!

    ROBIN

                          Thy mother is in the hut,
    Sheer broken down with hope and fearfulness,
    Waiting and trembling for thee, Will. Go in,
    Put thy big arm around her.

    [_WILL SCARLET goes into the hut with a cry._]

    SCARLET

                                Mother!

    FRIAR TUCK

                                      You see,
    My sons, you couldn't expect the lad to run!
    There is a certain looseness in the limbs,
    A quaking of the flesh that overcomes
    The bravest who has felt a hangman's rope
    Cuddling his neck.

    ROBIN

                        You judge him by the rope
    That cuddles your slim waist! Oh, you sweet armful,
    Sit down and pant! I warrant you were glad
    To bear him company.

    FRIAR TUCK

                          I'll not deny it!
    I am a man of solids. Like the Church,
    I am founded on a rock.

    [_He sits down._]

    ROBIN

                         Solids, i' faith!
    Sir, it is true he is partly based on beef;
    He grapples with it squarely; but fluids, too,
    Have played their part in that cathedral choir
    He calls his throat. One godless virtue, sir,
    They seem to have given him. Never a nightingale
    Gurgles jug! jug! in mellower tones than he
    When jugs are flowing. Never a thrush can pipe
    Sweet, sweet, so rarely as, when a pipe of wine
    Summers his throttle, we'll make him sing to us
    One of his heathen ditties--_The Malmsey Butt_,
    Or _Down the Merry Red Lane!_

    FRIAR TUCK

                                     Oh, ay, you laugh,
    But, though I cannot run, when I am rested
    I'll challenge you, Robin, to a game of buffets,
    One fair, square, stand-up, stand-still, knock-down blow
    Apiece; you'll need no more. If you not kiss
    The turf, at my first clout, I will forego
    Malmsey for ever!

    ROBIN

                         Friar, I recant;
    You're champion there. Fists of a common size
    I will encounter; but not whirling hams
    Like thine!

    FRIAR TUCK

                 I knew it!

    JENNY

                   [_Approaching._]

                         Please you, sirs, all is ready!

    FRIAR TUCK

    Ah, Jenny, Jenny, Jenny, that's good news!

    [_WILL SCARLET comes out of the hut with his arm round his
    mother. They all sit down at the table of turfs. Enter
    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF timidly._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Is there a place for me?

    A FORESTER

                            Ay, come along!

    FRIAR TUCK

    Now, Robin, don't forget the grace, my son.

    ROBIN

    [_Standing up._]

    It is our custom, sir, since our repast
    Is borrowed from the King, to drain one cup
    To him, and his return from the Crusade,
    Before we dine. That same wine-bibbing friar
    Calls it our 'grace'; and constitutes himself
    Remembrancer--without a cause, for never
    Have we forgotten, never while bugles ring
    Thro' Sherwood, shall forget--Outlaws, the King!

    [_All stand up except the KNIGHT._]

    CRIES

    The King and his return from the Crusade!

    [_They drink and resume their seats._]

    ROBIN

    You did not drink the health, sir Knight. I hope
    You hold with Lion-Heart.

    KNIGHT

                          Yes; I hold with him.
    You were too quick for me. I had not drawn
    These gauntlets off.
                         But tell me, Lady Marian,
    When is your bridal day with Robin Hood?

    MARIAN

    We shall be wedded when the King comes home
    From the Crusade.

    KNIGHT

                         Ah, when the King comes home!
    That's music--all the birds of April sing
    In those four words for me--the King comes home.

    MARIAN

    I am glad you love him, sir.

    ROBIN

                         But you're not eating!
    Your helmet's locked and barred! Will you not raise
    Your visor?

    KNIGHT

    [_Laughs._]

                         Ha! ha! ha! You see I am trapped!
    I did not wish to raise it! Hunger and thirst
    Break down all masks and all disguises, Robin.

    [_He rises and removes his helmet, revealing the face of RICHARD
    COEUR DE LION._]

    ROBIN

    The King!

    [_They all leap to their feet._]

    OUTLAWS

                         The King! The King!

    ROBIN

                         But oh, my liege,
    I should have known, when we were hard beset
    Around Will Scarlet by their swarming bands,
    And when you rode out of the Eastern sky
    And hurled our foemen down, I should have known
    It was the King come home from the Crusade!
    And when I was beset here in the wood
    By treacherous hounds again, I should have known
    Whose armour suddenly burned between the leaves!
    I should have known, either it was St. George
    Or else the King come home from the Crusade!

    RICHARD

    Indeed there is one thing that might have told you,
    Robin--a lover's instinct, since it seems
    So much for you and Marian depends
    On my return.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                        Sire, you will pardon me,
    For I am only a fool, and yet methinks
    You know not half the meaning of those words--
    The King, the King comes home from the Crusade!
    Thrust up your swords, heft uppermost, my lads,
    And shout--the King comes home from the Crusade.

    [_He leaps on a seat, and thrusts up the King's sword, heft uppermost,
    as if it were a cross._]

    ROBIN

    Pardon him, sire, poor Shadow-of-a-Leaf has lost
    His wits!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

              That's what Titania said you'd say,
    Poor sweet bells out of tune! But oh, don't leave,
    Don't leave the forest! There's darker things to come!
    Don't leave the forest! I have wits enough at least
    To wrap my legs around my neck for warmth
    On winter nights.

    RICHARD

                      Well, you've no need to pass
    The winter in these woods--

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                        Oh, not _that_ winter!

    ROBIN

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, be silent!

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF goes aside and throws himself down sobbing
    among the ferns._]

    RICHARD

                              When even your cave
    Methinks can scarce be cheery. Huntingdon,
    Your earldom we restore to you this day!
    You and my Lady Marian shall return
    To Court with us, where your true bridal troth
    Shall be fulfilled with golden marriage bells.
    Now, friends, the venison pasty! We must hear
    _The Malmsey Butt_ and _Down the Merry Red Lane_,
    Ere we set out, at dawn, for London Town.

    ROBIN

    Allan-a-dale shall touch a golden string
    To speed our feast, sire, for he soars above
    The gross needs of the Churchman!

    RICHARD

                                    Allan-a-Dale?

    WILL SCARLET

    Our greenwood minstrel, sire! His harp is ours
    Because we won his bride for him.

    RICHARD

                                    His bride?

    REYNOLD GREENLEAF

    Was to be wedded, sire, against her will
    Last May, to a rich old baron.

    RICHARD

                                 Pigeon-pie--
    And Malmsey--yes--a rich old baron--tell!

    ROBIN

    Sire, on the wedding day, my merry men
    Crowded the aisles with uninvited guests;
    And, as the old man drew forth the golden ring,
    They threw aside their cloaks with one great shout
    Of 'Sherwood'; and, for all its crimson panes,
    The church was one wild sea of Lincoln green!
    The Forest had broken in, sire, and the bride
    Like a wild rose tossing on those green boughs,
    Was borne away and wedded here by Tuck
    To her true lover; and so--his harp is ours.

    ALLAN-A-DALE

    No feasting song, sire, but the royal theme
    Of chivalry--a song I made last night
    In yonder ruined chapel. It is called
    _The Old Knight's Vigil_.

    RICHARD

                         Our hearts will keep it young!

    [_ALLAN-A-DALE sings, SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF raises his head among the
    ferns._]

    [_Song._]

    I

    Once, in this chapel, Lord
      Young and undaunted,
    Over my virgin sword
      Lightly I chaunted,--
    "Dawn ends my watch. I go
    Shining to meet the foe!"

    II

    "Swift with thy dawn," I said,
      "Set the lists ringing!
    Soon shall thy foe be sped,
      And the world singing!
    Bless my bright plume for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF rises to his knees amongst the ferns._]

    III

    "War-worn I kneel to-night,
      Lord, by Thine altar!
    Oh, in to-morrow's fight,
      Let me not falter!
    Bless my dark arms for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    IV

    "Keep Thou my broken sword
      All the long night through
    While I keep watch and ward!
      Then--the red fight through,
    Bless the wrenched haft for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    V

    "Keep, in thy piercèd hands,
      Still the bruised helmet:
    Let not their hostile bands
      Wholly o'erwhelm it!
    Bless my poor shield for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    VI

    "Keep Thou the sullied mail,
      Lord, that I tender
    Here, at Thine altar-rail!
      Then--let Thy splendour
    Touch it once ... and I go
    Stainless to meet the foe."

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF rises to his feet and takes a step towards the
    minstrel._]

    [_Curtain._]




ACT IV


SCENE I. _Garden of the King's Palace. Enter JOHN and ELINOR._

    ELINOR

    You will be king the sooner! Not a month
    In England, and my good son Lion-Heart
    Must wander over-seas again. These two,
    Huntingdon and his bride, must bless the star
    Of errant knighthood.

    JOHN

                          He stayed just long enough
    To let them pass one fearless honeymoon
    In the broad sunlight of his royal favour,
    Then, like a meteor off goes great King Richard,
    And leaves them but the shadow of his name
    To shelter them from my revenge. They know it!
    I have seen her shiver like a startled fawn
    And draw him closer, damn him, as I passed.

    ELINOR

    They would have flitted to the woods again
    But for my Lord Fitzwalter.

    JOHN

                                That old fool
    Has wits enough to know I shall be king,
    And for his land's sake cheats himself to play
    Sir Pandarus of Troy. "'Tis wrong, dear daughter,
    To think such evil." Pah, he makes me sick!

    ELINOR

    Better to laugh. He is useful.

    JOHN

                                If I were king!
    If Richard were to perish over-seas!
    I'd--

    ELINOR

          You'd be king the sooner. Never fear:
    These wandering meteors flash into their graves
    Like lightning, and no thunder follows them
    To warn their foolish henchmen.

    JOHN

    [_Looking at her searchingly._]

                                  Shall I risk
    The King's return?

    ELINOR

                      What do you mean?

    JOHN

                                      I mean
    I cannot wait and watch this Robin Hood
    Dangle the fruit of Tantalus before me,
    Then eat it in my sight! I have borne enough!
    He gave me like a fairing to my brother
    In Sherwood Forest; and I now must watch him,
    A happy bridegroom with the happy bride,
    Whose lips I meant for mine.

    ELINOR

                                And do you think
    I love to see it?

    JOHN

                        Had it not been for you
    He would have died ere this!

    ELINOR

                                Then let him die!

    JOHN

    Oh, ay, but do you mean it, mother?

    ELINOR

                                      God,
    I hate him, hate him!

    JOHN

                            Mother, he goes at noon
    To Sherwood Forest, with a bag of gold
    For some of his old followers. If, by chance
    He fall--how saith the Scripture?--among thieves
    And vanish--is not heard of any more,
    I think Suspicion scarce could lift her head
    Among these roses here to hiss at me,
    When Lion-Heart returns.

    ELINOR

                            Vanish?

    JOHN

                                  I would not
    Kill him too quickly. I would have him taken
    To a dungeon that I know.

    ELINOR

                              You have laid your trap
    Already? Tell me. You need not be afraid!
    I saw them kiss, in the garden, yesternight;
    And I have wondered, ever since, if fire
    Could make a brand quite hot enough to stamp
    My hate upon him.

    JOHN

                        Well, then, I will tell you--
    The plan is laid; and, if his bag of gold
    Rejoice one serf to-day, then I'll resign
    Maid Marian to his loving arms for ever.
    But you must help me, mother, or she'll suspect.
    Do not let slip your mask of friendliness,
    As I have feared. Look--there our lovers come
    Beneath that arch of roses. Look, look, mother,
    They are taking leave of one another now,
    A ghastly parting, for he will be gone
    Well nigh four hours, they think. To look at them,
    One might suppose they knew it was for ever.

    ELINOR

    Come, or my hate will show itself in my face:
    I must not see them.

    [_Exeunt PRINCE and ELINOR. A pause. Enter ROBIN HOOD and
    MARIAN._]

    ROBIN

                          So, good-bye, once more,
    Sweetheart.

    MARIAN

                Four hours; how shall I pass the time?
    Four hours, four ages, you will scarce be home
    By dusk; how shall I pass it?

    ROBIN

                                  You've to think
    What robe to wear at the great masque to-night
    And then to don it. When you've done all that
    I shall be home again.

    MARIAN

                            What, not before?

    ROBIN

    That's not unlikely, either.

    MARIAN

                                Now you mock me,
    But you'll be back before the masque begins.

    ROBIN

    I warrant you I will.

    MARIAN

                          It is a month
    To-day since we were married. Did you know it?
    Fie, I believe you had forgotten, Robin.

    ROBIN

    I had, almost. If marriage make the moons
    Fly, as this month has flown, we shall be old
    And grey in our graves before we know it.
    I wish that we could chain old Father Time.

    MARIAN

    And break his glass into ten thousand pieces.

    ROBIN

    And drown his cruel scythe ten fathom deep,
    Under the bright blue sea whence Love was born:

    MARIAN

    Ah, but we have not parted all this month
    More than a garden's breadth, an arrow's flight:
    Time will be dead till you come back again.
    Four hours of absence make four centuries!
    Do you remember how the song goes, Robin,
    That bids true lovers not to grieve at parting
    Often? for Nature gently severs them thus,
    Training them up with kind and tender art,
    For the great day when they must part for ever.

    ROBIN

    Do you believe it, Marian?

    MARIAN

                              No; for love
    Buried beneath the dust of life and death,
    Would wait for centuries of centuries,
    Ages of ages, until God remembered,
    And, through that perishing cloud-wrack, face looked up
    Once more to loving face.

    ROBIN

                              Your hope--and mine!
    Is not a man's poor memory, indeed,
    A daily resurrection? Your hope--and mine!

    MARIAN

    And all the world's at heart! I do believe it.

    ROBIN

    And I--if only that so many souls
    Like yours have died believing they should meet
    Again, lovers and children, little children!
    God will not break that trust. I have found my heaven
    Again in you; and, though I stumble still,
    Your small hand leads me thro' the darkness, up
    And onward, to the heights I dared not see,
    And dare not even now; but my head bows
    Above your face; I see them in your eyes.
    Love, point me onward still!

    [_He takes her in his arms._]

                                Good-bye! Good-bye!

    MARIAN

    Come back, come back, before the masque begins!

    ROBIN

    Ay, or a little later--never fear:
    You'll not so easily lose me.

    MARIAN

                                  I shall count
    The minutes!

    ROBIN

                  Why, you're trembling!

    MARIAN

                                      Yes, I am foolish.
    This is the first small parting we have had;
    But--you'll be back ere dusk?

    ROBIN

    [_Laughing._]

                                 Ah, do you think
    That chains of steel could hold me, sweet, from you,
    With those two heavenly eyes to call me home,
    Those lips to welcome me? Good-bye!

    MARIAN

                                        Good-bye!

    [_He goes hurriedly out. She looks after him for a moment, then
    suddenly calls._]

    Robin! Ah, well, no matter now--too late!

    [_She stands looking after him._]


SCENE II. _Sherwood Forest: dusk. Outside the cave, as in the second
act. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF runs quickly across the glade, followed by PUCK._

    PUCK

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf! Shadow-of-a-Leaf! Shadow-of-a-Leaf!
    Don't dance away like that; don't hop; don't skip
    Like that, I tell you! I'll never do it again,
    I promise. Don't be silly now! Come here;
    I want to tell you something. Ah, that's right.
    Come, sit down here upon this bank of thyme
    "While I thine amiable ears"--Oh, no,
    Forgive me, ha! ha! ha!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Now, Master Puck,
    You'll kindly keep your word! A foxglove spray
    In the right hand is deadlier than the sword
    That mortals use, and one resounding thwack
    Applied to your slim fairyhood's green limbs
    Will make it painful, painful, very painful,
    Next time your worship wishes to sit down
    Cross-legged upon a mushroom.

    PUCK

                                  Ha! ha! ha!
    Poor Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                         You keep your word, that's all!

    PUCK

    Haven't I kept my word? Wasn't it I
    That made you what these poor, dull mortals call
    Crazy? Who crowned you with the cap and bells?
    Who made you such a hopeless, glorious fool
    That wise men are afraid of every word
    You utter? Wasn't it I that made you free
    Of fairyland--that showed you how to pluck
    Fern-seed by moonlight, and to walk and talk
    Between the lights, with urchins and with elves?
    Is there another fool twixt earth and heaven
    Like you--ungrateful rogue--answer me that!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    All true, dear gossip, and for saving me
    From the poor game of blind man's buff men call
    Wisdom, I thank you; but to hang and buzz
    Like a mad dragon-fly, now on my nose,
    Now on my neck, now singing in my ears,
    Is that to make me free of fairyland?
    No--that's enough to make the poor fool mad
    And take to human wisdom.

    PUCK

                               Yet you love me,
    Ha! ha!--you love me more than all the rest.
    You can't deny it! You can't deny it! Ha! ha!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    I won't deny it, gossip. E'en as I think
    There must be something loves us creatures, Puck,
    More than the Churchmen say. We are so teased
    With thorns, bullied with briars, baffled with stars.
    I've lain sometimes and laughed until I cried
    To see the round moon rising o'er these trees
    With that same foolish face of heavenly mirth
    Winking at lovers in the blue-bell glade.

    PUCK

    Lovers! Ha! ha! I caught a pair of 'em
    Last night, behind the ruined chapel! Lovers!
    O Lord, these mortals, they'll be the death of me!
    Hist, who comes here?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                            Scarlet and Little John,
    And all the merry men--not half so merry
    Since Robin went away. He was to come
    And judge between the rich and poor to-day,
    I think he has forgotten.

    PUCK

                              Hist, let me hide
    Behind this hawthorn bush till they are gone.

    [_Enter the FORESTERS--they all go into the cave except SCARLET
    and LITTLE JOHN, who stand at the entrance, looking
    anxiously back._]

    LITTLE JOHN

    I have never known the time when Robin Hood
    Said "I will surely come," and hath not been
    Punctual as yonder evening star.

    SCARLET

                                    Pray God
    No harm hath fallen him. Indeed he said,
    "Count on my coming."

    LITTLE JOHN

                        I'll sound yet one more call.
    They say these Courts will spoil a forester.
    It may be he has missed the way. I'd give
    My sword-hand just to hear his jolly bugle
    Answer me.

    [_He blows a forest call. They listen. All is silent._]

    SCARLET

              Silence--only the sough of leaves!

    LITTLE JOHN

    Well, I'm for sleep: the moon is not so bright
    Since Robin left us.

    SCARLET

                        Ha! Shadow-of-a-Leaf, alone?
    I thought I heard thy voice.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                Oh, he will talk
    With ferns and flowers and whisper to the mice!
    Perfectly happy, art thou not, dear fool?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Perfectly happy since I lost my wits!

    SCARLET

    Pray that thou never dost regain them, then,
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                    I thank you kindly, sir,
    And pray that you may quickly lose your own,
    And so be happy, too. Robin's away,
    But, if you'd lost your wits, you would not grieve.

    SCARLET

    Good-night, good fool.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                        I will not say "Good-night,"
    Wise man, for I am crazed, and so I know
    'Tis good, and yet you'll grieve. I wish you both
    A bad night that will tease your wits away
    And make you happy.

    [_The OUTLAWS enter the cave. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF beckons to
    PUCK, who steals out again._]

    PUCK

                        Shadow-of-a-Leaf, some change
    Is creeping o'er the forest. I myself
    Scarce laugh so much since Robin went away!
    Oh, my head hangs as heavily as a violet
    Brimmed with the rain. Shadow-of-a-Leaf, a cloud,
    A whisper steals across this listening wood!
    I am growing afraid. Dear fool, I am thy Puck,
    But I am growing afraid there comes an end
    To all our Sherwood revels, and I shall never
    Tease thee again.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                      Here comes the King!

    [_Enter OBERON._]

                                        Hail, Oberon.
    King of the fairies, I strew ferns before you.
    There are no palms here: ferns do just as well!

    OBERON

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, our battles all are wasted;
    Our fairy dreams whereby we strove to warn
    Robin and Marian, wasted. Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    Dear Robin Hood, the lover of the poor,
    And kind Maid Marian, our forest queen,
    Are in the toils at last!

    [_He pauses._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                              Speak, speak!

    OBERON

                                      Prince John
    Hath trapped and taken Robin.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Is not Richard
    King of this England? Did not Richard tempt
    Robin, for Marian's sake, to leave the forest?
    Did he not swear upon the Holy Cross
    That Robin should be Earl of Huntingdon
    And hold his lands in safety?

    OBERON

                                Only fear
    Of Richard held the wicked Prince in leash.
    But Richard roamed abroad again. Prince John
    Would murder Robin secretly.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Wise men
    Fight too much for these holy sepulchres!
    Are not the living images of God
    Better than empty graves?

    OBERON

                            One grave is filled
    Now; for our fairy couriers have brought
    Tidings that Richard Lion-Heart is dead.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                            Dead?

    OBERON

    Dead! In a few brief hours the news will reach
    The wicked Prince. He will be King of England,
    With Marian in his power!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                              No way to save them!

    OBERON

    We cannot break our fairy vows of silence.
    A mortal, Shadow-of-a-Leaf, can break those vows,
    But only on pain of death.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Oberon, I,
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the fool, must break my vows!
    I must save Robin Hood that he may save
    Marian from worse than death.

    OBERON

                                  Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    Think what death means to you, never to join
    Our happy sports again, never to see
    The moonlight streaming through these ancient oaks
    Again, never to pass the fairy gates
    Again. We cannot help it. They will close
    Like iron in your face, and you will hear
    Our happy songs within; but you will lie
    Alone, without, dying, and never a word
    To comfort you, no hand to touch your brow.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    So be it. I shall see them entering in!
    The time is brief. Quick, tell me, where is Robin?
    Quick, or the news that makes Prince John a king
    Will ruin all.

    OBERON

                    Robin is even now
    Thrust in the great dark tower beyond the wood,
    The topmost cell where foot can never climb.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Cannot an arrow reach it? Ay, be swift;
    Come, lead me thither.

    OBERON

                            I cannot disobey
    The word that kills the seed to raise the wheat,
    The word that--Shadow-of-a-Leaf, I think I know
    Now, why great kings ride out to the Crusade.


    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Quickly, come, quickly!

    [_Exeunt OBERON and SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF. PUCK remains
    staring after them, then vanishes with a sob, between
    the trees. LITTLE JOHN and SCARLET appear once
    more at the mouth of the cave._]

    SCARLET

                          I thought I heard a voice.


    LITTLE JOHN

    'Twas only Shadow-of-a-Leaf again. He talks
    For hours among the ferns, plays with the flowers,
    And whispers to the mice, perfectly happy!


    SCARLET

    I cannot rest for thinking that some harm
    Hath chanced to Robin. Call him yet once more.

    [_LITTLE JOHN blows his bugle. All is silent. They stand
    listening._]


SCENE III. _A gloomy cell. ROBIN bound. PRINCE JOHN and two mercenaries.
A low narrow door in the background, small barred window on the left._

    PRINCE JOHN

    [_To the Mercenaries._]

    Leave us a moment. I have private matters
    To lay before this friend of all the poor.
    You may begin to build the door up now,
    So that you do not wall me in with him.

    [_The two men begin filling up the doorway with rude blocks of
    masonry._]

    So now, my good green foot-pad, you are trapped
    At last, trapped in the practice of your trade!
    Trapped, as you took your stolen Norman gold
    To what was it--a widow, or Saxon serf
    With eye put out for breaking forest laws?
    You hold with them, it seems. Your dainty soul
    Sickens at our gross penalties; and so
    We'll not inflict them on your noble self,
    Although we have the power. There's not a soul
    Can ever tell where Robin Hood is gone.
    These walls will never echo it.

    [_He taps the wall with his sword._]

                                      And yet
    There surely must be finer ways to torture
    So fine a soul as yours. Was it not you
    Who gave me like a fairing to my brother
    With lofty condescension in your eyes;
    And shall I call my mercenaries in
    And bid them burn your eyes out with hot irons?
    Richard is gone--he'll never hear of it!
    An Earl that plays the robber disappears,
    That's all. Most like he died in some low scuffle
    Out in the greenwood. I am half inclined
    To call for red-hot irons after all,
    So that your sympathy with Saxon churls
    May be more deep, you understand; and then
    It would be sweet for you, alone and blind,
    To know that you could never in this life
    See Marian's face again. But no--that's bad.
    Bad art to put hope's eyes out. It destroys
    Half a man's fear to rob him of his hope.
    No; you shall drink the dregs of it. Hope shall die
    More exquisite a death. Robin, my friend,
    You understand that, when I quit your presence,
    This bare blank cell becomes your living tomb.
    Do you not comprehend? It's none so hard.
    The doorway will be built up. There will be
    No door, you understand, but just a wall,
    Some six feet thick, of solid masonry.
    Nobody will disturb you, even to bring
    Water or food. You'll starve--see--like a rat,
    Bricked up and buried. But you'll have time to think
    Of how I tread a measure at the masque
    To-night, with Marian, while her wide eyes wonder
    Where Robin is--and old Fitzwalter smiles
    And bids his girl be gracious to the Prince
    For his land's sake. Ah, ha! you wince at that!
    Will you not speak a word before I go?
    Speak, damn you!

    [_He strikes ROBIN across the face with his glove. ROBIN remains
    silent._]

              Six days hence, if you keep watch
    At yonder window (you'll be hungry then)
    You may catch sight of Marian and Prince John
    Wandering into the gardens down below.
    You will be hungry then; perhaps you'll strive
    To call to us, or stretch a meagre arm
    Through those strong bars; but then you know the height
    Is very great--no voice can reach to the earth:
    This is the topmost cell in my Dark Tower.
    Men look like ants below there. I shall say
    To Marian, See that creature waving there
    High up above us, level with the clouds,
    Is it not like a winter-shrivelled fly?
    And she will laugh; and I will pluck her roses.
    And then--and then--there are a hundred ways,
    You know, to touch a woman's blood with thoughts
    Beyond its lawful limits. Ha! ha! ha!
    By God, you almost spoke to me, I think.
    Touches at twilight, whispers in the dark,
    Sweet sympathetic murmurs o'er the loss
    Of her so thoughtless Robin, do you think
    Maid Marian will be quite so hard to win
    When princes come to woo? There will be none
    To interrupt us then. Time will be mine
    To practise all the amorous arts of Ovid,
    And, at the last--

    ROBIN
                      Will you not free my hands?
    You have your sword. But I would like to fight you
    Here, with my naked hands. I want no more.

    PRINCE JOHN

    Ha! ha! At last the sullen speaks.
                                    That's all
    I wanted. I have struck you in the face.
    Is't not enough? You can't repay that blow.

    ROBIN

    Bury, me down in hell and I'll repay it
    The day you die, across your lying mouth
    That spoke of my true lady, I will repay it,
    Before the face of God!

    PRINCE JOHN

    [_Laughing._]

                              Meanwhile, for me
    Till you repay that blow, there is the mouth
    Of Marian, the sweet honey-making mouth
    That shall forestall your phantom blow with balm.
    Oh, you'll go mad too soon if I delay.
    I am glad you spoke. Farewell, the masons wait.
    And I must not be late for Marian.

    [_Exit thro' the small aperture now left in the doorway. It
    is rapidly closed and sounds of heavy masonry being
    piled against it are heard. ROBIN tries to free his
    hands and after an effort, succeeds. He hurls himself
    against the doorway, and finds it hopeless. He
    turns to the window, peers through it for a moment, then
    suddenly unwinds a scarf from his neck, ties it to one
    of the bars and stands to one side._]

    ROBIN
    Too high a shot for most of my good bowmen!
    What's that? A miss?

    [_He looks thro' the window._]

                        Good lad, he'll try again!

    [_He stands at the side once more and an arrow comes thro' the
    window._]

    Why, that's like magic!

    [_He pulls up the thread attached to it._]

                            Softly, or 'twill break!--
    Ah, now 'tis sturdy cord.
                              --I'll make it fast.
    But, how to break these bars!
                                St. Nicholas,
    There's someone climbing. He must have a head
    Of iron, and the lightness of a cat!
    Downward is bad enough, but up is more
    Than mortal! Who the devil can it be?
    Thank God, it's growing dark. But what a risk!
    None of my merry men could e'en attempt it.
    I'm very sure it can't be Little John.
    What, Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF appears at the window._]

                          'Fore God, dear faithful fool,
    I am glad to see you.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                          Softly, gossip, softly,
    Pull up the rope a little until we break
    This bar away--or some kind friend may see
    The dangling end below. Now here's a toothpick,
    Six inches of grey steel, for you to work with,
    And here's another for me. Pick out the mortar!

    [_They work to loosen the bars._]

    Wait! Here's a rose I brought you in my cap
    And here's a spray of fern! Old Nature's keys
    Open all prisons, I'll throw them in for luck,

    [_He throws them into the cell and begins working feverishly again._]

    So that the princes of the world may know
    The forest let you out. Down there on earth,
    If any sees me, they will only think
    The creepers are in leaf. Pick out the mortar!
    That's how the greenwood works. You know, 'twill thrust
    Its tendrils through these big grey stones one day
    And pull them down. I noticed in the courtyard
    The grass is creeping though the crevices
    Already, and yellow dandelions crouch
    In all the crumbling corners. Pick it out!
    This is a very righteous work indeed
    For men in Lincoln green; for what are we
    But tendrils of old Nature, herald sprays!
    We scarce anticipate. Pick the mortar out.
    Quick, there's no time to lose, although to-night
    We're in advance of sun and moon and stars
    And all the tackling sands in Time's turned glass.

    [_With a sudden cry._]

    Richard is dead!

    ROBIN
                    Richard is dead! The King
    Is dead!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                Ah, dead! Come, pick the mortar out,
    Out of the walls of towers and shrines and tombs!
    For now Prince John is King, and Lady Marian
    In peril, gossip! Yet we are in advance
    Of sun and moon to-night, for sweet Prince John
    Is not aware yet of his kinglihood,
    Or of his brother's death.

    ROBIN

    [_Pausing a moment._]

                           Why, Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    What does this mean?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                          Come, pick the mortar out;
    You have no time to lose. This very night
    My Lady Marian must away to Sherwood.
    At any moment the dread word may come
    That makes John King of England. Quick, be quick!

    ROBIN

    She is at the masque to-night!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Then you must mask
    And fetch her thence! Ah, ha, the bar works loose.
    Pull it!

    [_They pull at the bar, get it free, and throw it into the cell._]

              Now, master, follow me down the rope.

    [_Exit ROBIN thro' the window._]


SCENE IV. _Night. The garden of the King's palace (as before), but
lighted with torches for the masque. Music swells up and dies away
continually. Maskers pass to and fro between the palace and the garden.
On the broad terrace in front some of them are dancing a galliard._

[_PRINCE JOHN enters and is met by_ QUEEN ELINOR, _neither of them
masked._]

    ELINOR

    All safe?

    PRINCE JOHN

                Ay, buried and bricked up now, to think
    Alone, in the black night, of all I told him.
    Thank God, we have heard the last of Robin Hood.

    ELINOR

    [_She puts on her mask._]

    You are sure?

    PRINCE JOHN

                      I saw him entombed with my own eyes!
    Six feet of solid masonry. Look there,
    There's the young knight you've lately made your own.
    Where is my Lady Marian? Ah, I see her!
    With that old hypocrite, Fitzwalter.

    [_They part. PRINCE JOHN puts on his mask as he goes._]

    A LADY

                                    But tell me
    Where is Prince John?

    A MASKER

                            That burly-shouldered man
    By yonder pillar, talking with old Fitzwalter,
    And the masked girl, in green, with red-gold hair,
    Is Lady Marian!

    THE LADY

                        Where is Robin Hood?
    I have never seen him, but from all one hears
    He is a wood-god and a young Apollo,
    And a more chaste Actæon all in one.

    MASKER

    Oh, ay, he never watched Diana bathing,
    Or, if he did, all Sherwood winked at it.
    Who knows? Do you believe a man and maid
    Can sleep out in the woods all night, as these
    Have slept a hundred times, and put to shame
    Our first poor parents; throw the apple aside
    And float out of their leafy Paradise
    Like angels?

    LADY

                  No; I fear the forest boughs
    Could tell sad tales. Oh, I imagine it--
    Married to Robin, by a fat hedge-priest
    Under an altar of hawthorn, with a choir
    Of sparrows, and a spray of cuckoo-spit
    For holy water! Oh, the modest chime
    Of blue-bells from a fairy belfry, a veil
    Of evening mist, a robe of golden hair;
    A blade of grass for a ring; a band of thieves
    In Lincoln green to witness the sweet bans;
    A glow-worm for a nuptial taper, a bed
    Of rose-leaves, and wild thyme and wood-doves' down.
    Quick! Draw the bridal curtains--three tall ferns--
    Across the cave mouth, lest a star should peep
    And make the wild rose leap into her face!
    Pish! A sweet maid! But where is Robin Hood?

    MASKER

    I know not; but he'd better have a care
    Of Mistress Marian. If I know Prince John
    He has marked her for his own.

    LADY

                                  I cannot see
    What fascinates him.

    MASKER

                          No, you are right, nor I.

    PRINCE JOHN

    Come, Lady Marian, let me lead you out
    To tread a measure.

    MARIAN

                        Pray, sir, pardon me!
    I am tired.

    FITZWALTER

    [_Whispering angrily to her._]

                  Now, Marian, be not so ungracious.
    You both abuse him and disparage us.
    His courtiers led the ladies they did choose.
    Do not displease him, girl. I pray you, go!
    Dance out your galliard. God's dear holy-bread,
    Y'are too forgetful. Dance, or by my troth,
    You'll move my patience. I say you do us wrong.

    MARIAN

    I will do what you will. Lead, lead your dance.

    [_Exeunt JOHN and MARIAN._]

    FIRST MASKER

    [_To a lady, as they come up from the garden._]

    Will you not let me see your face now, sweet?

    LADY

    You hurt my lip with that last kiss of yours.
    Hush, do not lean your face so close, I pray you;
    Loosen my fingers. There's my lord.

    FIRST MASKER

                                        Where? Where?
    Now, if I know him, I shall know your name!

    LADY

    That tall man with the damozel in red.

    FIRST MASKER

    Oh, never fear him. He, too, wore a mask!
    I saw them--

    [_They pass out talking._]

    SECOND MASKER

    [_Looking after them._]

                        Saw you those two turtle-doves!

    SECOND LADY

    Yes.

    SECOND MASKER

    Come with me, I'll show you where I caught them
    Among the roses, half an hour ago.

    [_They laugh and exeunt into the gardens. The music swells up
    and more dancers appear._]

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD, still in his forester's garb, but wearing a
    mask. He walks as if wounded and in pain. He
    sits down in the shadow of a pillar watching, and
    partly concealed from the throng._]

    THIRD LADY

    Remember now to say you did not see me
    Here at the masque.

    THIRD MASKER

                          Or shall I say that I
    Was out in Palestine?

    [_They pass. Enter little ARTHUR PLANTAGENET. He comes
    up to ROBIN HOOD._]

    ARTHUR

                            Are you not Robin Hood?

    ROBIN

    Hush, Arthur. Don't you see I wear a mask
    Like all the rest to-night?

    ARTHUR

                                Why do they wear
    Masks?

    ROBIN

            They must always wear some sort of mask
    At court. Sometimes they wear them all their lives.

    ARTHUR

    You are jesting, Robin. Now I wanted you
    To tell me tales of Sherwood. Tell me how
    You saved Will Scarlet.

    ROBIN

                            Why, I've told you that
    A score of times.

    ARTHUR

                  I know, I want to hear it
    Again. Well, tell me of that afternoon
    When Lion-Heart came home from the Crusade.
    I have often thought of that. It must have been
    Splendid! You weren't expecting it at all?

    ROBIN

    No, not at all; but, Arthur, tell me first
    Have you seen Lady Marian?

    ARTHUR

                              Yes, I saw her
    Treading a measure with my Uncle John!

    ROBIN

    Stand where you are and watch; and, if you see her,
    Beckon her. Then I'll tell you how the King
    Came home from the Crusade.

    ARTHUR

                                First, let me tell you
    Just how I think it was. It must have been
    Like a great picture. All your outlaws there
    Sitting around your throne of turf, and you
    Judging the rich and poor. That's how it was
    Last night, I dreamed of it; and you were taking
    The baron's gold and giving it to the halt
    And blind; and then there was a great big light
    Between the trees, as if a star had come
    Down to the earth and caught among the boughs,
    With beams like big soft swords amongst the ferns
    And leaves, and through the light a mighty steed
    Stepped, and the King came home from the Crusade.
    Was it like that? Was there a shining light?

    ROBIN

    I think there must have been, a blinding light,

    ARTHUR

    Filling an arch of leaves?

    ROBIN

                                  Yes!

    ARTHUR

                                  That was it!
    That's how the King came home from the Crusade.

    ROBIN

    But there--you've told the story!

    ARTHUR

                                    Ah, not all!

    ROBIN

    No, not quite all. What's that?

    [_The music suddenly stops. The maskers crowd together whispering
    excitedly._]

    ARTHUR

                                Why have they stopped
    The music? Ah, there's Hubert. Shall I ask him?

    ROBIN

    Yes, quickly, and come back!

    [_ARTHUR runs up to a masker. Several go by hurriedly._]

    FIRST MASKER

                                  The King is dead!

    SECOND MASKER

    Where did it happen? France?

    FIRST MASKER

                                I know not, sir!

    [_ARTHUR returns._]

    ARTHUR

    Robin, they say the King is dead! So John
    Is king now, is he not?

    ROBIN

                              Ay, John is king!
    Now, tell me quickly, use your eyes, my boy,
    Where's Lady Marian?

    ARTHUR

                          Ah, there she is at last,
    Alone!

    ROBIN

    Go to her quickly, and bring her hither.

    [_ARTHUR runs off and returns with_ MARIAN.]

    MARIAN

    Robin, thank God, you have returned. I feared--

    ROBIN

    No more, dear heart, you must away to Sherwood!
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf is waiting by the orchard
    With your white palfrey. Away, or the new king
    Will hunt us down. I'll try to gain you time.
    Go--quickly!

    MARIAN

    Robin, your face is white, you are wounded!
    What's this--there's blood upon your doublet!
    Robin!

    ROBIN

          Nothing! Go, quickly!

    MARIAN

                              Robin, I cannot leave you.

    ROBIN

    Go, Marian. If you ever loved me, go.

    MARIAN

    You'll follow?

    ROBIN

                  Oh, with my last breath I will,
    God helping me; but I must gain you time!
    Quickly! Here comes the King!

    MARIAN

                                  Oh, follow soon!

    [_Exit._]

    [_ROBIN sits down again, steadying himself against the pillar.
    JOHN appears at the doors of the palace, above the terrace, a
    scroll in his hand._]

    JOHN

    My friends, the King is dead!

    MASKERS


    [_Taking off their masks, with a cry._]

                          Long live King John!

    JOHN


    [_Coming down amongst them._]

    Our masque is ended by this grievous news;
    But where's my Lady Marian? I had some word
    To speak with her! Not here! Why--

    ROBIN


    [_Still masked, rises and confronts the King, who stares at him and
    shrinks back a little._]

                                      All the masks
    Are off, sire! No, perhaps they wear them still.

    JOHN

    Who is this?

    ROBIN

    One that was dead and lives. You say
    Your brother, the great King, is dead. Oh, sire,
    If that be so, you'll hear a dead man speak,
    For your dead brother's sake. You say the King
    Is dead; but you are king. So the King lives!
    You are King of England now from sea to sea,
    Is it not so? Shout, maskers, once again,
    Long live the King!

    MASKERS

                          Long live the King!

    ROBIN

                                            You see
    What power is yours! Your smile is life, your frown
    Death. At a word from you the solid earth
    Would shake with tramp of armies. You can call
    Thousands to throw away their lives like straws
    Upon your side, if any foreign king
    Dare to affront you.

    [_He draws nearer to JOHN, who still shrinks a little, as if in fear._]

                        Richard, you say, is dead,
    And yet, O King, I say that the great King
    Lives!

    [_He strikes JOHN across the face. JOHN cowers and staggers back.
    The MASKERS draw their swords, the women
    scream and rush together. ROBIN turns, sword in hand,
    to confront the MASKERS._]

              Back, fools; for I say that the great King
    Lives. Do not doubt it. Ye have dreamed him dead
    How often. Hark, God in heaven, ye know that voice.

    [_A voice is heard drawing nearer thro' the distant darkness of the
    garden, singing. All listen. JOHN'S face whitens._]

    [_Song._]

    Knight, on the narrow way,
      Where wouldst thou ride?
    "Onward," I heard him say,
      "Love, to thy side."

    ROBIN

    'Tis Blondel! Still vaunt-courier to the King,
    As when he burst the bonds of Austria! Listen!

    [_Song nearer._]

    "Nay," sang a bird above,
      "Stay, for I see
    Death, in the mask of love,
      Waiting for thee."

    MASKERS

    [_Resuming their masks and muttering to one another._]

    Can the King live? Is this John's treachery? Look,
    He is crushed with fear!

    ROBIN
                           Listen! I'll go to meet him.

    [_Exit into the garden._]

    MASKERS

    It was the song of Blondel! The same song
    He made with Richard, long since!--
                                        Blondel's voice!
    Just as we heard it on that summer's night
    When Lion-Heart came home from the Crusade.

    [_The Song still drawing nearer._]

    "Death! What is Death?" he cried.
      "I must ride on,
    On to my true love's side,
      Up to her throne!"

    [_Enter BLONDEL, from the garden. He stands, startled by the
    scene before him._]

    MASKERS

    Blondel! Where is the King? Where is the King?

    BLONDEL

    Did ye not know?--Richard, the King, is dead!

    MASKERS

    Dead!

    JOHN

            Dead! And ye let the living dog escape
    That dared snarl at our sovereignty. I know him,
    Risen from the dead or not. I know 'twas he,
    'Twas Robin Hood! After him; hunt him down!
    Let him not live to greet another sun.
    After him!

    MASKERS

    [_Drawing their swords and plunging into the darkness._]

              After him; hunt the villain down!

    [_Curtain._]




ACT V


SCENE I. _Morning. Sherwood Forest (as before). LITTLE JOHN and some of
the OUTLAWS are gathered together talking. Occasionally they look
anxiously toward the cave and at the approaches through the wood. Enter
two FORESTERS, running and breathless._

    FIRST FORESTER

    The King's men! They are scouring thro' the wood,
    Two troops of them, five hundred men in each
    And more are following.

    SECOND FORESTER

                            We must away from here
    And quickly.

    LITTLE JOHN

                          Where did you sight them?

    SECOND FORESTER

                             From the old elm,
    Our watch-tower. They were not five miles away!

    FIRST FORESTER

    Five, about five. We saw the sunlight flash
    Along, at least five hundred men at arms;
    And, to the north, along another line,
    Bigger, I think; but not so near.

    SECOND FORESTER

                                   Where's Robin?
    We must away at once!

    FIRST FORESTER

                           No time to lose!

    LITTLE JOHN

    His wound is bitter--I know not if we dare
    Move him!

    FIRST FORESTER

              His wound?

    LITTLE JOHN

                          Ay, some damned arrow pierced him
    When he escaped last night from the Dark Tower.
    He never spoke of it when first he reached us;
    And, suddenly, he swooned. He is asleep
    Now. He must not be wakened. They will take
    Some time yet ere they thread our forest-maze.

    FIRST FORESTER

    Not long, by God, not long. They are moving fast.

    [_MARIAN appears at the mouth of the cave. All turn to look at
    her, expectantly. She seems in distress._]

    MARIAN

    He is tossing to and fro. I think his wound
    Has taken fever! What can we do?

    FRIAR TUCK

                                  I've sent
    A messenger to Kirklee Priory,
    Where my old friend the Prioress hath store
    Of balms and simples, and hath often helped
    A wounded forester. Could we take him there,
    Her skill would quickly heal him.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                      The time is pressing!

    FRIAR TUCK

    The lad will not be long!

    [_ROBIN appears tottering and white at the mouth of the cave._]

    MARIAN

    [_Running to him._]

                                   O Robin, Robin,
    You must not rise! Your wound!

    ROBIN

    [_He speaks feverishly._]

                                        Where can I rest
    Better than on my greenwood throne of turf?
    Friar, I heard them say they had some prisoners.
    Bring them before me.

    FRIAR TUCK

                          Master, you are fevered,
    And they can wait.

    ROBIN

                             Yes, yes; but there are some
    That cannot wait, that die for want of food,
    And then--the Norman gold will come too late,
    Too late.

    LITTLE JOHN
                O master, you must rest.

    [_Going up to him._]

    MARIAN
                                        Oh, help me,
    Help me with him. Help me to lead him back.

    ROBIN

    No! No! You must not touch me! I will rest
    When I have seen the prisoners, not before.

    LITTLE JOHN

    He means it, mistress, better humour him
    Or he will break his wound afresh.

    MARIAN

                                         O Robin,
    Give me your word that you'll go back and rest,
    When you have seen them.

    ROBIN

                                Yes, I will try, I will try!
    But oh, the sunlight! Where better, sweet, than this?

    [_She leads him to the throne of turf and he sits down upon it, with
    MARIAN at his side._]

    The Friar is right. This life is wine, red wine,
    Under the greenwood boughs! Oh, still to keep it,
    One little glen of justice in the midst
    Of multitudinous wrong. Who knows? We yet
    May leaven the whole world.

    [_Enter the Outlaws, with several prisoners, among them, a
    KNIGHT, an ABBOT, and a FORESTER._]

                                  Those are the prisoners?
    You had some victims of the forest laws
    That came to you for help. Bring them in, too,
    And set them over against these lords of the earth!

    [_Some ragged women and children appear. Several serfs with
    iron collars round their necks and their eyes put out,
    are led gently in._]

    Is that our Lincoln green among the prisoners?
    There? One of my own band?

    LITTLE JOHN

                                Ay, more's the pity!
    We took him out of pity, and he has wronged
    Our honour, sir; he has wronged a helpless woman
    Entrusted to his guidance thro' the forest.

    ROBIN

    Ever the same, the danger comes from those
    We fight for, those below, not those above!
    Which of you will betray me to the King?

    THE FORESTER

    Do you ask _me_, sir?

    ROBIN

                              Judas answered first,
    With "Master, is it I?" Hang not thy head!
    What say'st thou to this charge?

    THE FORESTER

                                Why, Friar Tuck
    Can answer for me. Do you think he cares
    Less for a woman's lips than I?

    FRIAR TUCK

                                    Cares less,
    Thou rotten radish? Nay, but a vast deal more!
    God's three best gifts to man,--woman and song
    And wine, what dost _thou_ know of all their joy?
    Thou lean pick-purse of kisses?

    ROBIN

                                    Take him out,
    Friar, and let him pack his goods and go,
    Whither he will. I trust the knave to thee
    And thy good quarter-staff, for some five minutes
    Before he says "Farewell."

    FRIAR

                                    Bring him along,
    Give him a quarter-staff, I'll thrash him roundly.

    [_He goes out. Two of the FORESTERS follow with the prisoner.
    Others bring the ABBOT before ROBIN._]

    ROBIN

    Ah! Ha! I know him, the godly usurer
    Of York!

    LITTLE JOHN

               We saw a woman beg for alms,
    One of the sufferers by the rule which gave
    This portly Norman his fat priory
    And his abundant lands. We heard him say
    That he was helpless, had not one poor coin
    To give her, not a scrap of bread! He wears
    Purple beneath his cloak: his fine sleek palfrey
    Flaunted an Emperor's trappings!

    ABBOT

                                      Man, the Church
    Must keep her dignity!

    ROBIN

    [_Pointing to the poor woman, etc._]

                            Ay, look at it!
    There is your dignity! And you must wear
    Silk next your skin to show it. But there was one
    You call your Master, and He had not where
    To lay His head, save one of these same trees!

    ABBOT

    Do you blaspheme! I pray you, let me go!
    There are grave matters waiting. I am poor!

    ROBIN

    Look in his purse and see.

    ABBOT

    [_Hurriedly._]

                                    I have five marks
    In all the world, no more. I'll give them to you!

    ROBIN

    Look in his purse and see.

    [_They pour a heap of gold out of his purse._]

    ROBIN

                                Five marks, Indeed!
    Here's, at the least, a hundred marks in gold!

    ABBOT

    That is my fees, my fees; you must not take them!

    ROBIN

    The ancient miracle!--five loaves, two small fishes;
    And then--of what remained--they gathered up
    Twelve basketsful!

    ABBOT

                          Oh, you blaspheming villains!

    ROBIN

    Abbot, I chance to know how this was wrought,
    This miracle; wrought with the blood, anguish and sweat
    Of toiling peasants, while the cobwebs clustered
    Around your lordly cellars of red wine.
    Give him his five and let him go.

    ABBOT

    [_Going out._]

                                        The King
    Shall hear of this! The King will hunt you down!

    ROBIN

    And now--the next!

    SCARLET

                        Beseech you, sir, to rest,
    Your wound will--

    ROBIN

                    No! The next, show me the next!

    SCARLET

    This Norman baron--

    ROBIN

                        What, another friend!
    Another master of broad territories.
    How many homes were burned to make you lord
    Of half a shire? What hath he in his purse?

    SCARLET

    Gold and to spare!

    BARON

                      To keep up mine estate
    I need much more.

    ROBIN

    [_Pointing to the poor._]

                      Ay, you need these! these! these!

    BARON

    [_Protesting._]

    I am not rich.

    ROBIN

                  Look in his purse and see.

    BARON

    You dogs, the King shall hear of it!

    ROBIN

    [_Murmuring as if to himself._]

                                      Five loaves!
    And yet, of what remained, they gathered up
    Twelve basketsful. The bread of human kindness
    Goes far! Oh, I begin to see new meanings
    In that old miracle! How much? How much?

    SCARLET

    Five hundred marks in gold!

    ROBIN

    [_Half rising and speaking with a sudden passion._]

                              His churls are starving,
    Starving! Their little children cry for bread!
    One of those jewels on his baldric there
    Would feed them all in plenty all their lives!
    Five loaves--and yet--and yet--of what remained,
    The fragments, mark you, twelve great basketsful!

    BARON

    I am in a madman's power! The man is mad!

    ROBIN

    Take all he has, all you can get. To-night,
    When all is dark (we must have darkness, mind,
    For deeds like this) blind creatures will creep out
    With groping hands and gaping mouths, lean arms,
    And shrivelled bodies, branded, fettered, lame,
    Distorted, horrible; and they will weep
    Great tears like gouts of blood upon our feet,
    And we shall succour them and make them think
    (That's if you have not mangled their poor souls
    As well, or burned their children with their homes),
    We'll try to make them think that some few roods
    Of earth are not so bitter as hell might be.
    Are you not glad to think of this? Nay--go--
    Or else your face will haunt me when I die!
    Take him quickly away. The next! The next!
    O God!

    [_Flings up his arms and falls fainting._]

    MARIAN

    [_Bending over him._]

            O Robin! Robin! Help him quickly.
    The wound! The wound!

    [_They gather round ROBIN. The OUTLAWS come back with the
    captive FORESTER, his pack upon his back._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_To the FORESTER._]

                        Now, get you gone and quickly!
    What, what hath happened?

    [_FRIAR TUCK and the OUTLAWS join the throng round ROBIN. The
    FORESTER shakes his fist at them and goes across the glade
    muttering. The MESSENGER from Kirklee Priory comes out of the
    forest at the same moment and speaks to him, not knowing of his
    dismissal._]

    MESSENGER

                            All's well! Robin can come
    To Kirklee. Our old friend the Prioress
    Is there, and faithful! They've all balms and simples
    To heal a wound.

    FORESTER

    [_Staring at him._]

                      To Kirklee?

    MESSENGER

                                Yes, at sunset,
    We'll take him to the borders of the wood
    All will be safe.
    Where he can steal in easily, alone.

    FORESTER

                                        The King's men are at hand!

    MESSENGER

    Oh, but if we can leave him there, all's safe;
    We'll dodge the King's men.

    FORESTER

                                When is he to go?

    MESSENGER

    Almost at once; but he must not steal in
    Till sundown, when the nuns are all in chapel.
    How now? What's this? What's this?

    [_He goes across to the throng round ROBIN._]

    FORESTER

    [_Looking after him._]

    Alone, to Kirklee!

    [_Exit._]


SCENE II. _A room in Kirklee Priory. A window on the right overlooks a
cloister leading up to the chapel door. The forest is seen in the
distance, the sun beginning to set behind it. The PRIORESS and a NOVICE
are sitting in a window-seat engaged in broidery work._

    NOVICE

    He must be a good man--this Robin Hood!
    I long to see him. Father used to say
    England had known none like him since the days
    Of Hereward the Wake.

    PRIORESS

                              He will be here
    By vespers. You shall let him in. Who's that?
    Can that be he? It is not sundown yet.
    See who is there.

    [_Exit NOVICE. She returns excitedly._]

    NOVICE

                        A lady asks to see you!
    She is robed like any nun and yet she spoke
    Like a great lady--one that is used to rule
    More than obey; and on her breast I saw
    A ruby smouldering like a secret fire
    Beneath her cloak. She bade me say she came
    On Robin Hood's behest.

    PRIORESS

                            What? Bring her in
    Quickly.

    [_Exit NOVICE and returns with QUEEN ELINOR in a nun's garb. At
    the sign from the PRIORESS the NOVICE retires._]

    ELINOR

              Madam, I come to beg a favour.
    I am a friend of Robin Hood. I have heard--
    One of his Foresters, this very noon
    Brought me the news--that he is sorely wounded;
    And purposes to seek your kindly help
    At Kirklee Priory.

    PRIORESS

                            Oh, then indeed,
    You must be a great friend, for this was kept
    Most secret from all others.

    ELINOR

                                A great friend!
    He was my page some fifteen years ago,
    And all his life I have watched over him
    As if he were my son! I have come to beg
    A favour--let me see him when he comes.
    My husband was a soldier, and I am skilled
    In wounds. In Palestine I saved his life
    When every leech despaired of it, a wound
    Caused by a poisoned arrow.

    PRIORESS

                              You shall see him.
    I have some skill myself in balms and simples,
    But, in these deadlier matters I would fain
    Trust to your wider knowledge.

    ELINOR

                                  Let me see him alone;
    Alone, you understand. His mind is fevered.
    I have an influence over him. Do not say
    That I am here, or aught that will excite him.
    Better say nothing--lead him gently in,
    And leave him. In my hands he is like a child.

    PRIORESS

    It shall be done. I see you are subtly versed
    In the poor workings of our mortal minds.

    ELINOR

    I learnt much from a wise old Eastern leech
    When I was out in Palestine.

    PRIORESS

                                I have heard
    They have great powers and magic remedies;
    They can restore youth to the withered frame.

    ELINOR

    There is only one thing that they cannot do.

    PRIORESS

    And what?

    ELINOR

              They cannot raise the dead.

    PRIORESS

                                        Ah, no;
    I am most glad to hear you say it, most glad
    To know we think alike. That is most true--
    Yes--yes--most true; for God alone, dear friend,
    Can raise the dead!

    [_A bell begins tolling slowly._]

                        The bell for even-song!
    You have not long to wait.

    [_Shadowy figures of nuns pass the windows and enter the chapel.
    The sunset deepens._]

                              Will you not pray
    With me?

    [_The PRIORESS and QUEEN ELINOR kneel down together before a
    little shrine. Enter the NOVICE._]

    NOVICE

                    There is a forester at the door.
    Mother, I think 'tis he!

    PRIORESS

    [_Rising._]

                            Admit him, then.

    ELINOR

    Leave me: I will keep praying till he comes.

    PRIORESS

    You are trembling! You are not afraid?

    ELINOR

    [_With eyes closed as in strenuous devotion._]

                                    No; no;
    Leave me, I am but praying!

    [_A chant swells up in the chapel. Exit PRIORESS. ELINOR continues
    muttering as in prayer. Enter ROBIN HOOD,
    steadying himself on his bow, weak and white. She
    rises and passes between him and the door to confront
    him._]

    ELINOR

    Ah, Robin, you have come to me at last
    For healing. Pretty Marian cannot help you
    With all her kisses.

    ROBIN HOOD

    [_Staring at her wildly._]

                        You! I did not know
    That you were here. I did not ask your help.
    I must go--Marian!

    [_He tries to reach the door, but reels in a half faint on the way.
    ELINOR supports him as he pauses, panting for breath._]

    ELINOR

                        Robin, your heart is hard,
    Both to yourself and me. You cannot go,
    Rejecting the small help which I can give
    As if I were a leper. Ah, come back.
    Are you so unforgiving? God forgives!
    Did you not see me praying for your sake?
    Think, if you think not of yourself, oh, think
    Of Marian--can you leave her clinging arms
    Yet, for the cold grave, Robin? I have risked
    Much, life itself, to bring you help this day!
    I have some skill in wounds.

    [_She holds him closer and brings her face near to his own, looking
    into his eyes._]

                                Ah, do you know
    How slowly, how insidiously this death
    Creeps, coil by tightening coil, around a man,
    When he is weak as you are? Do you know
    How the last subtle coil slips round your throat
    And the flat snake-like head lifts up and peers
    With cruel eyes of cold, keen inquisition,
    Rivetting your own, until the blunt mouth sucks
    Your breath out with one long, slow, poisonous kiss?

    ROBIN HOOD

    O God, that nightmare! Leave me! Let me go!

    ELINOR

    You stare at me as if you saw that snake.
    Ha! Ha! Your nerves are shaken; you are so weak!
    You cannot go! What! Fainting? Ah, rest here
    Upon this couch.

    [_She half supports, half thrusts him back to a couch, in an alcove
    out of sight and draws a curtain. There is a knock at
    the door._]

    ELINOR

                    Who's there?

    PRIORESS

                                Madam, I came
    To know if I could help in anything.

    ELINOR

    Nothing! His blood runs languidly. It needs
    The pricking of a vein to make the heart
    Beat, and the sluggish rivers flow. I have brought
    A lance for it. I'll let a little blood.
    Not over-much; enough, enough to set
    The pulses throbbing.

    PRIORESS

                        Maid Marian came with him.
    She waits without and asks--

    ELINOR

                              Let her not come
    Near him till all is done. Let her not know
    Anything, or the old fever will awake.
    I'll lance his arm now!

    [_The PRIORESS closes the door. ELINOR goes into the alcove. The
    chant from the chapel swells up again. QUEEN
    ELINOR comes out of the alcove, white and trembling.
    She speaks in a low whisper as she looks back._]

    Now, trickle down, sweet blood. Grow white, fond lips
    That have kissed Marian--yet, she shall not boast
    You kissed her last; for I will have you wake
    To the fierce memory of this kiss in heaven
    Or burn with it in hell;

    [_She kneels down as if to kiss the face of ROBIN, within. The
    chant from the chapel swells up more loudly. The door
    slowly opens. MARIAN steals in. ELINOR rises and confronts
    her._]

    ELINOR

    [_Laying a hand upon ROBIN'S bow beside her._]

    Hush! Do not wake him!

    MARIAN

    [_In a low voice._]

                          What have you done with him?

    ELINOR

    [_As MARIAN advances towards the couch._]

                                                He is asleep.
    Hush! Not a step further! Stay where you are! His life
    Hangs on a thread.

    MARIAN
                        Why do you stare upon me?
    What have you done? What's this that trickles down--

    [_Stoops to the floor and leaps back with a scream._]

    It is blood. You have killed him!

    ELINOR

    [_Seizes the bow and shoots. MARIAN falls._]

                                      Follow him--down to hell.
    King John will find you there.

    [_Exit. The scene grows dark._]

    MARIAN

    [_Lifts her head with a groan._]

                              I am dying, Robin!
    O God, I cannot wake him! Robin! Robin!
    Give me one word to take into the dark!
    He will not wake! He will not wake! O God,
    Help him!

    [_She falls back unconscious. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF, a green spray
    in his hand, opens the casement and stands for a moment
    in the window against the last glow of sunset, then
    enters and runs to the side of ROBIN._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Hurriedly._]

                Awake, awake, Robin, awake!
    The forest waits to help you! All the leaves
    Are listening for your bugle. Ah, where is it?
    Let but one echo sound and the wild flowers
    Will break thro' these grey walls and the green sprays
    Drag down these deadly towers. Wake, Robin, wake,
    And let the forest drown the priest's grey song
    With happy murmurs. Robin, the gates are open
    For you and Marian! All I had to give
    I have given to thrust them open, the dear gates
    Of fairyland which I shall never pass
    Again. I can no more, I am but a shadow,
    Dying as mortals die! It is not I
    That calls, not I, but Marian. Hear her voice!
    Robin, awake!
    O, master mine, farewell!

    [_Exit lingeringly through the casement._]

    ROBIN

    [_ROBIN is dimly seen in the mouth of the alcove. He stretches out
    his hands blindly in the dark._]

    Marian! Why do you call to me in dreams?
    Why do you call me? I must go. What's this?
    Help me, kind God, for I must say one word,
    Only one word--good-bye--to Marian,
    To Marian--Ah, too weak, too weak!

    [_He sees the dark body of MARIAN and utters a cry, falling on his
    knees beside her._]

                                      O God,
    Marian! Marian!
                      My bugle! Ah, my bugle!

    [_He rises to his feet and, drowning the distant organ-music, he
    blows a resounding forest-call. It is answered by several
    in the forest. He falls on his knees by MARIAN and
    takes her in his arms._]

    O Marian, Marian, who hath used thee so?

    MARIAN

    Robin, it is my death-wound. Ah, come close.

    ROBIN

    Marian, Marian, what have they done to thee?

    [_The OUTLAWS are heard thundering at the gates with cries._]

    OUTLAWS

    Robin! Robin! Robin! Break down the doors.

    [_The terrified nuns stream past the window, out of the chapel.
    The OUTLAWS rush into the room. The scene still
    darkens._]

    SCARLET

    Robin and Marian!

    LITTLE JOHN

                        Christ, what devil's hand
    Hath played the butcher here? Quick, hunt them down,
    They passed out yonder. Let them not outlive
    Our murdered king and queen.

    REYNOLD GREENLEAF

                                O Robin, Robin,
    Who shot this bitter shaft into her breast?

    [_Several stoop and kneel by the two lovers._]

    ROBIN HOOD

    Speak to me, Marian, speak to me, only speak!
    Just one small word, one little loving word
    Like those--do you remember?--you have breathed
    So many a time and often, against my cheek,
    Under the boughs of Sherwood, in the dark
    At night, with nothing but the boughs and stars
    Between us and the dear God up in heaven!
    O God, why does a man's heart take so long
    To break? It would break sooner if you spoke
    A word to me, a word, one small kind word.

    MARIAN

    Sweetheart!

    ROBIN

    Sweetheart! You have broken it, broken it! Oh, kind,
    Kind heart of Marian!

    MARIAN

                          Robin, come soon!

    [_Dies._]

    ROBIN

    Soon, sweetheart! Oh, her sweet brave soul is gone!
    Marian, I follow quickly!

    SCARLET

                              God, Kirklee
    Shall burn for this!

    LITTLE JOHN

                        Kirklee shall burn for this!
    O master, master, you shall be avenged!

    ROBIN

    No; let me stand upright! Your hand, good Scarlet!
    We have lived our lives and God be thanked we go
    Together thro' this darkness. We shall wake,
    Please God, together. It is growing darker!
    I cannot see your faces. Give me my bow
    Quickly into my hands, for my strength fails
    And I must shoot one last shaft on the trail
    Of yonder setting sun, never to reach it!
    But where this last, last bolt of all my strength,
    My hope, my love, shall fall, there bury us both,
    Together, and tread the green turf over us!
    The bow!

    [_SCARLET hands him his bow. He stands against the faint glow
    of the window, draws the bow to full length, shoots and
    falls back into the arms of LITTLE JOHN._]

    LITTLE JOHN

    [_Laying him down._]

          Weep, England, for thine outlawed lover,
    Dear Robin Hood, the poor man's friend, is dead.

    [_The scene becomes quite dark. Then out of the darkness, and as
    if at a distance, the voice of SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF is
    heard singing the fairy song of the first scene. The
    fairy glade in Sherwood begins to be visible in the gloom
    by the soft light of the ivory gates which are swinging
    open once more among the ferns. As the scene grows
    clearer the song of SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF grows more and
    more triumphant and is gradually caught up by the
    chorus of the fairy host within the woods._]

    [_Song of SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF._]

    I

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The world begins again!
              And O, the red of the roses,
                And the rush of the healing rain!

    II

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The Princess wakes from sleep;
              For the soft green keys of the wood-land
                Have opened her donjon-keep!

    III

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                Their grey walls hemmed us round;
              But, under my greenwood oceans,
                Their castles are trampled and drowned.

    IV

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                My green sprays climbed on high,
              And the ivy laid hold on their turrets
                And haled them down from the sky!

    V

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                They were strong! They are overthrown!
              For the little soft hands of the wild-flowers
                Have broken them, stone by stone.

    VI

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                Though Robin lie dead, lie dead,
              And the green turf by Kirklee
                Lie light over Marian's head,

    VII

    Green ferns on the crimson sky-line,
                What bugle have you heard?
              Was it only the peal of the blue-bells,
                Was it only the call of a bird?

    VIII

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The rose o'er the fortalice floats!
              My nightingales chant in their chapels,
                My lilies have bridged their moats!

    IX

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                King Death, in the light of the sun,
              Shrinks like an elfin shadow!
                His reign is over and done!

    X

    The hawthorn whitens the wood-land;
                My lovers, awake, awake,
              Shake off the grass-green coverlet,
                Glide, bare-foot, thro' the brake!

    XI

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                And, under the great green boughs,
              I have found out a place for my lovers,
                I have built them a beautiful house.

    XII

    Green ferns in the dawn-red dew-fall,
                This gift by my death I give,--
              They shall wander immortal thro' Sherwood!
                In my great green house they shall live!

    XIII

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                When the first wind blows from the South,
              They shall meet by the Gates of Faërie!
                She shall set her mouth to his mouth!

    XIV

    He shall gather her, fold her and keep her;
                They shall pass thro' the Gates, they shall live!
              For the Forest, the Forest has conquered!
                This gift by my death I give!

    XV

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The world awakes anew;
              And O, the scent of the hawthorn,
                And the drip of the healing dew!

    [_The song ceases. TITANIA and OBERON come out into the moon-lit
    glade._]

    OBERON

    Yet one night more the gates of fairyland
    Are opened by a mortal's kindly deed.
    But Robin Hood and Marian now are driven
    As we shall soon be driven, from the world
    Of cruel mortals.

    TITANIA

                    Mortals call them dead;
    Oberon, what is death?

    OBERON

                            Only a sleep.
    But these may dream their happy dreams in death
    Before they wake to that new lovely life
    Beyond the shadows; for poor Shadow-of-a-Leaf
    Has given them this by love's eternal law
    Of sacrifice, and they shall enter in
    To dream their lover's dream in fairyland.

    TITANIA

    And Shadow-of-a-Leaf?

    OBERON

                          He cannot enter now.
    The gates are closed against him.

    TITANIA

                                    But is this
    For ever?

    OBERON
               We fairies have not known or heard
    What waits for those who, like this wandering Fool,
    Throw all away for love. But I have heard
    There is a great King, out beyond the world,
    Not Richard, who is dead, nor yet King John;
    But a great King who one day will come home
    Clothed with the clouds of heaven from His Crusade.

    TITANIA

    The great King!

    OBERON

                    Hush, the poor dark mortals come!

    [_The crowd of serfs, old men, poor women, and children, begin to
    enter as the fairy song swells up within the gates again.
    ROBIN and MARIAN are led along by a crowd of fairies
    at the end of the procession._]

    TITANIA

    And there, see, there come Robin and his bride.
    And the fairies lead them on, strewing their path
    With ferns and moon-flowers. See, they have entered in!

    [_The last fairy vanishes thro' the gates._]

    OBERON

    And we must follow, for the gates may close
    For ever now. Hundreds of years may pass
    Before another mortal gives his life
    To help the poor and needy.

    [_OBERON and TITANIA follow hand in hand thro' the gates. They
    begin to close. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF steals wistfully
    and hesitatingly across, as if to enter. They close
    in his face. He goes up to them and leans against
    them sobbing, a small green figure, looking like a
    greenwood spray against their soft ivory glow. The
    fairy music dies. He sinks to his knees and holds up
    his hands. Immediately a voice is heard singing and
    drawing nearer thro' the forest._]

    [_Song--drawing nearer._]

    Knight on the narrow way,
      Where wouldst thou ride?
    "Onward," I heard him say,
      "Love, to thy side!"

    "Nay," sang a bird above,
      "Stay, for I see
    Death in the mask of love
      Waiting for thee."

    [_Enter BLONDEL, leading a great white steed. He stops and looks
    at the kneeling figure._]

    BLONDEL

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Rising to his feet._]

                      Blondel!

    BLONDEL

                              I go to seek
    My King!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_In passionate grief._]

            The King is dead!

    BLONDEL

    [_In yet more passionate joy and triumph._]

                        The great King lives!

    [_Then more tenderly._]

    Will you not come and look for Him with me?

    [_They go slowly together through the forest and are lost to sight.
    BLONDEL'S voice is heard singing the third stanza
    of the song in the distance, further and further away._]

    "Death? What is Death?" he cried.
          "I must ride on!"

    [_Curtain._]




TALES OF THE MERMAID TAVERN


I

A KNIGHT OF THE OCEAN-SEA

    Under that foggy sunset London glowed,
    Like one huge cob-webbed flagon of old wine.
    And, as I walked down Fleet Street, the soft sky
    Mowed thro' the roaring thoroughfares, transfused
    Their hard sharp outlines, blurred the throngs of black
    On either pavement, blurred the rolling stream
    Of red and yellow busses, till the town
    Turned to a golden suburb of the clouds.
    And, round that mighty bubble of St. Paul's,
    Over the up-turned faces of the street,
    An air-ship slowly sailed, with whirring fans,
    A voyager in the new-found realms of gold,
    A shadowy silken chrysalis whence should break
    What radiant wings in centuries to be.

    So, wandering on, while all the shores of Time
    Softened into Eternity, it seemed
    A dead man touched me with his living hand,
    A flaming legend passed me in the streets
    Of London--laugh who will--that City of Clouds,
    Where what a dreamer yet, in spite of all,
    Is man, that splendid visionary child
    Who sent his fairy beacon through the dusk,
    On a blue bus before the moon was risen,--
    _This Night, at eight, The Tempest!_

                                             Dreaming thus,
    (Small wonder that my footsteps went astray!)
    I found myself within a narrow street,
    Alone. There was no rumour, near or far,
    Of the long tides of traffic. In my doubt
    I turned and knocked upon an old inn-door,
    Hard by, an ancient inn of mullioned panes,
    And crazy beams and over-hanging eaves:
    And, as I knocked, the slowly changing west
    Seemed to change all the world with it and leave
    Only that old inn steadfast and unchanged,
    A rock in the rich-coloured tides of time.

    And, suddenly, as a song that wholly escapes
    Remembrance, at one note, wholly returns,
    There, as I knocked, memory returned to me.
    I knew it all--the little twisted street,
    The rough wet cobbles gleaming, far away,
    Like opals, where it ended on the sky;
    And, overhead, the darkly smiling face
    Of that old wizard inn; I knew by rote
    The smooth sun-bubbles in the worn green paint
    Upon the doors and shutters.

                                  There was one
    Myself had idly scratched away one dawn,
    One mad May-dawn, three hundred years ago,
    When out of the woods we came with hawthorn boughs
    And found the doors locked, as they seemed to-night.
    Three hundred years ago--nay, Time was dead!
    No need to scan the sign-board any more
    Where that white-breasted siren of the sea
    Curled her moon-silvered tail among such rocks
    As never in the merriest seaman's tale
    Broke the blue-bliss of fabulous lagoons
    Beyond the Spanish Main.

                                And, through the dream,
    Even as I stood and listened, came a sound
    Of clashing wine-cups: then a deep-voiced song
    Made the old timbers of the Mermaid Inn
    Shake as a galleon shakes in a gale of wind
    When she rolls glorying through the Ocean-sea.


    SONG

    I

    Marchaunt Adventurers, chanting at the windlass,
      Early in the morning, we slipped from Plymouth Sound,
    All for Adventure in the great New Regions,
      All for Eldorado and to sail the world around!
    Sing! the red of sun-rise ripples round the bows again.
      Marchaunt Adventurers, O sing, we're outward bound,
    All to stuff the sunset in our old black galleon,
      All to seek the merchandise that no man ever found.

    _Chorus:_ Marchaunt Adventurers!
              Marchaunt Adventurers!

      Marchaunt Adventurers, O, whither are ye bound?--
    All for Eldorado and the great new Sky-line,
      All to seek the merchandise that no man ever found.


    II

    Marchaunt Adventurers, O, what'ull ye bring home again?--
      Wonders and works and the thunder of the sea!
    Whom will ye traffic with?--The King of the Sunset!
      What shall be your pilot then?--A wind from Galilee.
    Nay, but ye be marchaunts, will ye come back empty-handed?--
      Ay, we be marchaunts, though our gain we ne'er shall see.
    Cast we now our bread upon the waste wild waters.
      After many days, it shall return with usury.

    _Chorus:_ Marchaunt Adventurers!
              Marchaunt Adventurers!

      What shall be your profit in the mighty days to be?--
    Englande!--Englande!--Englande!--Englande!--
      Glory everlasting and the lordship of the sea!

            And there, framed in the lilac patch of sky
            That ended the steep street, dark on its light,
            And standing on those glistering cobblestones
            Just where they took the sunset's kiss, I saw
            A figure like foot-feathered Mercury,
            Tall, straight and splendid as a sunset-cloud.

    Clad in a crimson doublet and trunk-hose,
    A rapier at his side; and, as he paused,
    His long fantastic shadow swayed and swept
    Against my feet.

                      A moment he looked back,
    Then swaggered down as if he owned a world
    Which had forgotten--did I wake or dream?--
    Even his gracious ghost!

                              Over his arm
    He swung a gorgeous murrey-coloured cloak
    Of Ciprus velvet, caked and smeared with mud
    As on the day when--did I dream or wake?
    And had not all this happened once before?--
    When he had laid that cloak before the feet
    Of Gloriana! By that mud-stained cloak,
    'Twas he! Our Ocean-Shepherd! Walter Raleigh!
    He brushed me passing, and with one vigorous thrust
    Opened the door and entered. At his heels
    I followed--into the Mermaid!--through three yards
    Of pitch-black gloom, then into an old inn-parlour
    Swimming with faces in a mist of smoke
    That up-curled, blue, from long Winchester pipes,
    While--like some rare old picture, in a dream
    Recalled--quietly listening, laughing, watching,
    Pale on that old black oaken wainscot floated
    One bearded oval face, young, with deep eyes,
    Whom Raleigh hailed as "Will!"

                                    But as I stared
    A sudden buffet from a brawny hand
    Made all my senses swim, and the room rang
    With laughter as upon the rush-strewn floor
    My feet slipped and I fell. Then a gruff voice
    Growled over me--"Get up now, John-a-dreams,
    Or else mine host must find another drawer!
    Hast thou not heard us calling all this while?"
    And, as I scrambled up, the rafters rang
    With cries of "Sack! Bring me a cup of sack!
    Canary! Sack! Malmsey! and Muscadel!"
    I understood and flew. I was awake,
    A leather-jerkined pot-boy to these gods,
    A prentice Ganymede to the Mermaid Inn!

    There, flitting to and fro with cups of wine,
    I heard them toss the Chrysomelan names
    From mouth to mouth--Lyly and Peele and Lodge,
    Kit Marlowe, Michael Drayton, and the rest,
    With Ben, rare Ben, brick-layer Ben, who rolled
    Like a great galleon on his ingle-bench.
    Some twenty years of age he seemed; and yet
    This young Gargantua with the bull-dog jaws,
    The T, for Tyburn, branded on his thumb,
    And grim pock-pitted face, was growling tales
    To Dekker that would fright a buccaneer.--
    How in the fierce Low Countries he had killed
    His man, and won that scar on his bronzed fist;
    Was taken prisoner, and turned Catholick;
    And, now returned to London, was resolved
    To blast away the vapours of the town
    With Boreas-throated plays of thunderous mirth.
    "I'll thwack their Tribulation-Wholesomes, lad,
    Their Yellow-faced Envies and lean Thorns-i'-the-Flesh,
    At the _Black-friars Theatre_, or _The Rose_,
    Or else _The Curtain_. Failing these, I'll find
    Some good square inn-yard with wide galleries,
    And windows level with the stage. 'Twill serve
    My Comedy of Vapours; though, I grant.
    For Tragedy a private House is best,
    Or, just as Burbage tip-toes to a deed
    Of blood, or, over your stable's black half-door,
    Marked _Battlements_ in white chalk, your breathless David
    Glowers at the whiter Bathsheba within,
    Some humorous coach-horse neighs a 'hallelujah'!
    And the pit splits its doublets. Over goes
    The whole damned apple-barrel, and the yard
    Is all one rough and tumble, scramble and scratch
    Of prentices, green madams, and cut-purses
    For half-chewed Norfolk pippins. Never mind!
    We'll build the perfect stage in Shoreditch yet.
    And Will, there, hath half promised I shall write
    A piece for his own company! What d'ye think
    Of _Venus and Adonis_, his first heir,
    Printed last week? A bouncing boy, my lad!
    And he's at work on a Midsummer's Dream
    That turns the world to fairyland!"

                                        All these
    And many more were there, and all were young!
    There, as I brimmed their cups, I heard the voice
    Of Raleigh ringing across the smoke-wreathed room,--
    "Ben, could you put a frigate on the stage,
    I've found a tragedy for you. Have you heard
    The true tale of Sir Humphrey Gilbert?"

                                            "No!"

    "Why, Ben, of all the tragical affairs
    Of the Ocean-sea, and of that other Ocean
    Where all men sail so blindly, and misjudge
    Their friends, their charts, their storms, their stars, their God,
    If there be truth in the blind crowder's song
    I bought in Bread Street for a penny, this
    Is the brief type and chronicle of them all.
    Listen!" Then Raleigh sent these rugged rhymes
    Of some blind crowder rolling in great waves
    Of passion across the gloom. At each refrain
    He sank his voice to a broad deep undertone,
    As if the distant roar of breaking surf
    Or the low thunder of eternal tides
    Filled up the pauses of the nearer storm,
    Storm against storm, a soul against the sea:--


A KNIGHT OF THE OCEAN-SEA

    Sir Humphrey Gilbert, hard of hand,
      Knight-in-chief of the Ocean-sea,
    Gazed from the rocks of his New Found Land
      And thought of the home where his heart would be.

    He gazed across the wintry waste
      That weltered and hissed like molten lead,--
    "He saileth twice who saileth in haste!
      I'll wait the favour of Spring," he said.

          _Ever the more, ever the more,
          He heard the winds and the waves roar!
          Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    The yellow clots of foam went by
      Like shavings that curl from a ship-wright's plane,
    Clinging and flying, afar and nigh,
      Shuddering, flying and clinging again.

    A thousand bubbles in every one
      Shifted and shimmered with rainbow gleams;
    But--had they been planets and stars that spun
      He had let them drift by his feet like dreams:

    Heavy of heart was our Admirall,
      For, out of his ships--and they were but three!--
    He had lost the fairest and most tall,
      And--he was a Knight of the Ocean-sea.

          _Ever the more, ever the more,
          He heard the winds and the waves roar!
          Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    Heavy of heart, heavy of heart,
      For she was a galleon mighty as May,
    And the storm that ripped her glory apart
      Had stripped his soul for the winter's way;

    And he was aware of a whisper blown
      From foc'sle to poop, from windward to lee,
    That the fault was his, and his alone,
      And--he was a Knight of the Ocean-sea.

    "Had he done that! Had he done this!"
      And yet his mariners loved him well;
    But an idle word is hard to miss,
      And the foam hides more than the deep can tell.

    And the deep had buried his best-loved books,
      With many a hard-worn chart and plan:
    And a king that is conquered must see strange looks,
      So bitter a thing is the heart of man!

    And--"Who will you find to pay your debt?
      For a venture like this is a costly thing!
    Will they stake yet more, tho' your heart be set
      On the mightier voyage you planned for the Spring?"

    He raised his head like a Viking crowned,--
      "I'll take my old flag to her Majestie,
    And she will lend me ten thousand pound
      To make her Queen of the Ocean-sea!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            He heard the winds and the waves roar!
            Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    Outside--they heard the great winds blow!
      Outside--the blustering surf they heard,
    And the bravest there would ha' blenched to know
      That they must be taken at their own word.

    For the great grim waves were as molten lead
      --And he had two ships who sailed with three!--
    "And I sail not home till the Spring," he said,
      "They are all too frail for the Ocean-sea."

    But the trumpeter thought of an ale-house bench,
      And the cabin-boy longed for a Devonshire lane,
    And the gunner remembered a green-gowned wench,
      And the fos'cle whisper went round again,--

    "Sir Humphrey Gilbert is hard of hand,
      But his courage went down with the ship, may-be,
    And we wait for the Spring in a desert land,
      For--_he is afraid of the Ocean-sea_."

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            He heard the winds and the waves roar!
            Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    He knew, he knew how the whisper went!
      He knew he must master it, last or first!
    He knew not how much or how little it meant;
      But his heart was heavy and like to burst.

    "Up with your sails, my sea-dogs all!
      The wind has veered! And my ships," quoth he,
    "They will serve for a British Admirall
      Who is Knight-in-chief of the Ocean-sea!"

    His will was like a North-east wind
      That swept along our helmless crew;
    But he would not stay on the _Golden Hynde_,
      For that was the stronger ship of the two.

    "My little ship's-company, lads, hath passed
      Perils and storms a-many with me!
    Would ye have me forsake them at the last?
      They'll need a Knight of the Ocean-sea!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the winds and the waves roar!
            Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    Beyond Cape Race, the pale sun splashed
      The grim grey waves with silver light
    Where, ever in front, his frigate crashed
      Eastward, for England and the night.

    And still as the dark began to fall,
      Ever in front of us, running free,
    We saw the sails of our Admirall
      Leading us home through the Ocean-sea.

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the winds and the waves roar!
            But he sailed on, sailed on before._

    On Monday, at noon of the third fierce day
      A-board our _Golden Hynde_ he came,
    With a trail of blood, marking his way
      On the salt wet decks as he walked half-lame.

    For a rusty nail thro' his foot had pierced.
      "Come, master-surgeon, mend it for me;
    Though I would it were changed for the nails that amerced
      The dying thief upon Calvary."

    The surgeon bathed and bound his foot,
      And the master entreated him sore to stay;
    But roughly he pulled on his great sea-boot
      With--"The wind is rising and I must away!"

    I know not why so little a thing,
      When into his pinnace we helped him down,
    Should make our eyelids prick and sting
      As the salt spray were into them blown,

    But he called as he went--"Keep watch and steer
      By my lanthorn at night!" Then he waved his hand
    With a kinglier watch-word, "We are as near
      To heaven, my lads, by sea as by land!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the gathering tempest roar!
            But he sailed on, sailed on before._

    Three hundred leagues on our homeward road,
      We strove to signal him, swooping nigh,
    That he would ease his decks of their load
      Of nettings and fights and artillery.

    And dark and dark that night 'gan fall,
      And high the muttering breakers swelled,
    Till that strange fire which seamen call
      "Castor and Pollux," we beheld,

    An evil sign of peril and death,
      Burning pale on the high main-mast;
    But calm with the might of Gennesareth
      Our Admirall's voice went ringing past,

    Clear thro' the thunders, far and clear,
      Mighty to counsel, clear to command,
    Joyfully ringing, "We are as near
      To heaven, my lads, by sea as by land!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the rising hurricane roar!
            But he sailed on, sailed on before._

    And over us fled the fleet of the stars,
      And, ever in front of us, far or nigh,
    The lanthorn on his cross-tree spars
      Dipped to the Pit or soared to the Sky!

    'Twould sweep to the lights of Charles's Wain,
      As the hills of the deep 'ud mount and flee.
    Then swoop down vanishing cliffs again
      To the thundering gulfs of the Ocean-sea.

    We saw it shine as it swooped from the height,
      With ruining breakers on every hand,
    Then--a cry came out of the black mid-night,
      _As near to heaven by sea as by land!_

    And the light was out! Like a wind-blown spark;
      All in a moment! And we--and we--
    Prayed for his soul as we swept thro' the dark:
      For he was a Knight of the Ocean-sea.

            _Over our fleets for evermore
            The winds 'ull triumph and the waves roar!
            But he sails on, sails on before!_

    Silence a moment held the Mermaid Inn,
    Then Michael Drayton, raising a cup of wine,
    Stood up and said,--"Since many have obtained
    Absolute glory that have done great deeds,
    But fortune is not in the power of man,
    So they that, truly attempting, nobly fail,
    Deserve great honour of the common-wealth.
    Such glory did the Greeks and Romans give
    To those that in great enterprises fell
    Seeking the true commodity of their country
    And profit to all mankind; for, though they failed,
    Being by war, death, or some other chance,
    Hindered, their images were set up in brass,
    Marble and silver, gold and ivory,
    In solemn temples and great palace-halls,
    No less to make men emulate their virtues
    Than to give honour to their just deserts.
    God, from the time that He first made the world,
    Hath kept the knowledge of His Ocean-sea
    And the huge Æquinoctiall Continents
    Reserved unto this day. Wherefore I think
    No high exploit of Greece and Rome but seems
    A little thing to these Discoveries
    Which our adventurous captains even now
    Are making, out there, Westward, in the night,
    Captains most worthy of commendation,
    Hugh Willoughby--God send him home again
    Safe to the Mermaid!--and Dick Chauncellor,
    That excellent pilot. Doubtless this man, too,
    Sir Humphrey Gilbert, was worthy to be made
    Knight of the Ocean-sea. I bid you all
    Stand up, and drink to his immortal fame!"


II

A COINER OF ANGELS


    Some three nights later, thro' the thick brown fog,
    A link-boy, dropping flakes of crimson fire,
    Flared to the door and, through its glowing frame,
    Ben Jonson and Kit Marlowe, arm in arm,
    Swaggered into the Mermaid Inn and called
    For red-deer pies.
                             There, as they supped, I caught
    Scraps of ambrosial talk concerning Will,
    His _Venus and Adonis_.
                                  "Gabriel thought
    'Twas wrong to change the old writers and create
    A cold Adonis."
                            --"Laws were made for Will,
    Not Will for laws, since first he stole a buck
    In Charlecote woods."
                           --"Where never a buck chewed fern,"
    Laughed Kit, "unless it chewed the fern seed, too,
    And walked invisible."
                            "Bring me some wine," called Ben,
    And, with his knife thrumming upon the board,
    He chanted, while his comrade munched and smiled.


    I

    Will Shakespeare's out like Robin Hood
      With his merry men all in green,
    To steal a deer in Charlecote wood
      Where never a deer was seen.


    II

    He's hunted all a night of June,
      He's followed a phantom horn,
    He's killed a buck by the light of the moon,
      Under a fairy thorn.


    III

    He's carried it home with his merry, merry band,
      There never was haunch so fine;
    For this buck was born in Elfin-land
      And fed upon sops-in-wine.


    IV

    This buck had browsed on elfin boughs
      Of rose-marie and bay,
    And he's carried it home to the little white house
      Of sweet Anne Hathaway.


    V

    "The dawn above your thatch is red!
      Slip out of your bed, sweet Anne!
    I have stolen a fairy buck," he said,
      "The first since the world began.


    VI

    "Roast it on a golden spit,
      And see that it do not burn;
    For we never shall feather the like of it
      Out of the fairy fern."


    VII

    She scarce had donned her long white gown
      And given him kisses four,
    When the surly Sheriff of Stratford-town
      Knocked at the little green door.


    VIII

    They have gaoled sweet Will for a poacher;
      But squarely he fronts the squire,
    With "When did you hear in your woods of a deer?
      Was it under a fairy briar?"


    IX

    Sir Thomas he puffs,--"If God thought good
      My water-butt ran with wine,
    Or He dropt me a buck in Charlecote wood,
      I wot it is mine, not thine!"


    X

    "If you would eat of elfin meat,"
      Says Will, "you must blow up your horn!
    Take your bow, and feather the doe
      That's under the fairy thorn!


    XI

    "If you would feast on elfin food,
      You've only the way to learn!
    Take your bow and feather the doe
      That's under the fairy fern!"


    XII

    They're hunting high, they're hunting low,
      They're all away, away,
    With horse and hound to feather the doe
      That's under the fairy spray!


    XIII

    Sir Thomas he raged! Sir Thomas he swore!
      But all and all in vain;
    For there never was deer in his woods before,
      And there never would be again!


    And, as I brought the wine--"This is my grace,"
    Laughed Kit, "Diana grant the jolly buck
    That Shakespeare stole were toothsome as this pie."

    He suddenly sank his voice,--"Hist, who comes here?
    Look--Richard Bame, the Puritan! O, Ben, Ben,
    Your Mermaid Inn's the study for the stage,
    Your only teacher of exits, entrances,
    And all the shifting comedy. Be grave!
    Bame is the godliest hypocrite on earth!
    Remember I'm an atheist, black as coal.
    He has called me Wormall in an anagram.
    Help me to bait him; but be very grave.
    We'll talk of Venus."
                           As he whispered thus,
    A long white face with small black-beaded eyes
    Peered at him through the doorway. All too well,
    Afterwards, I recalled that scene, when Bame,
    Out of revenge for this same night, I guessed,
    Penned his foul tract on Marlowe's tragic fate;
    And, twelve months later, I watched our Puritan
    Riding to Tyburn in the hangman's cart
    For thieving from an old bed-ridden dame
    With whom he prayed, at supper-time, on Sundays.

    Like a conspirator he sidled in,
    Clasping a little pamphlet to his breast,
    While, feigning not to see him, Ben began:--

    "Will's _Venus and Adonis_, Kit, is rare,
    A round, sound, full-blown piece of thorough work,
    On a great canvas, coloured like one I saw
    In Italy, by one--Titian! None of the toys
    Of artistry your lank-haired losels turn,
    Your Phyllida--Love-lies-bleeding--Kiss-me-Quicks,
    Your fluttering Sighs and Mark-how-I-break-my-beats,
    Begotten like this, whenever and how you list,
    Your Moths of verse that shrivel in every taper;
    But a sound piece of craftsmanship to last
    Until the stars are out. 'Tis twice the length
    Of Vergil's books--he's listening! Nay, don't look!--
    Two hundred solid stanzas, think of that;
    But each a square celestial brick of gold
    Laid level and splendid. I've laid bricks and know
    What thorough work is. If a storm should shake
    The Tower of London down, Will's house would stand.
    Look at his picture of the stallion,
    Nostril to croup, that's thorough finished work!"

    "'Twill shock our Tribulation-Wholesomes, Ben!
    Think of that kiss of Venus! Deep, sweet, slow,
    As the dawn breaking to its perfect flower
    And golden moon of bliss; then slow, sweet, deep,
    Like a great honeyed sunset it dissolves
    Away!"
              A hollow groan, like a bass viol,
    Resounded thro' the room. Up started Kit
    In feigned alarm--"What, Master Richard Bame!
    Quick, Ben, the good man's ill. Bring him some wine!
    Red wine for Master Bame, the blood of Venus
    That stained the rose!"
                            "White wine for Master Bame,"
    Ben echoed, "Juno's cream that" ... Both at once
    They thrust a wine-cup to the sallow lips
    And smote him on the back.
    "Sirs, you mistake!" coughed Bame, waving his hands
    And struggling to his feet,
                                "Sirs, I have brought
    A message from a youth who walked with you
    In wantonness, aforetime, and is now
    Groaning in sulphurous fires!"
                                    "Kit, that means hell!"
    "Yea, sirs, a pamphlet from the pit of hell,
    Written by Robert Greene before he died.
    Mark what he styles it--_A Groatsworth of Wit
    Bought with a Million of Repentance_!"
                                              "Ah,
    Poor Rob was all his life-time either drunk,
    Wenching, or penitent, Ben! Poor lad, he died
    Young. Let me see now, Master Bame, you say
    Rob Greene wrote this on earth before he died,
    And then you printed it yourself in hell!"
    "Stay, sir, I came not to this haunt of sin
    To make mirth for Beëlzebub!"
                                    "O, Ben,
    That's you!"
                    "'Swounds, sir, am I Beëlzebub?
    Ogs-gogs!" roared Ben, his hand upon his hilt!
    "Nay, sir, I signified the god of flies!
    I spake out of the scriptures!" snuffled Bame
    With deprecating eye.
                              "I come to save
    A brand that you have kindled at your fire,
    But not yet charred, not yet so far consumed,
    One Richard Cholmeley, who declares to all
    He was persuaded to turn atheist
    By Marlowe's reasoning. I have wrestled with him,
    But find him still so constant to your words
    That only you can save him from the fire."
    "Why, Master Bame," said Kit, "had I the keys
    To hell, the damned should all come out and dance
    A morrice round the Mermaid Inn to-night."
    "Nay, sir, the damned are damned!"
                                        "Come, sit you down!
    Take some more wine! You'd have them all be damned
    Except Dick Cholmeley. What must I unsay
    To save him?" A quick eyelid dropt at Ben.
    "Now tell me, Master Bame!"
                                 "Sir, he derides
    The books of Moses!"
                               "Bame, do you believe?--
    There's none to hear us but Beëlzebub--
    Do you believe that we must taste of death
    Because God set a foolish naked wench
    Too near an apple-tree, how long ago?
    Five thousand years? But there were men on earth
    Long before that!" "Nay, nay, sir, if you read
    The books of Moses...." "Moses was a juggler!"
    "A juggler, sir, how, what!" "Nay, sir, be calm!
    Take some more wine--the white, if that's too red!
    I never cared for Moses! Help yourself
    To red-deer pie. Good!
                                 All the miracles
    You say that he performed--why, what are they?
    I know one Heriots, lives in Friday Street,
    Can do much more than Moses! Eat your pie
    In patience, friend, the mouth of man performs
    One good work at a time. What says he, Ben?
    The red-deer stops his--what? Sticks in his gizzard?
    O--_led them through the wilderness_! No doubt
    He did--for forty years, and might have made
    The journey in six months. Believe me, sir,
    That is no miracle. Moses gulled the Jews!
    Skilled in the sly tricks of the Egyptians,
    Only one art betrayed him. Sir, his books
    Are filthily written. I would undertake--
    If I were put to write a new religion--
    A method far more admirable. Eh, what?
    _Gruel in the vestibule?_ Interpret, Ben!
    His mouth's too full! _O, the New Testament!_
    Why, there, consider, were not all the Apostles
    Fishermen and base fellows, without wit
    Or worth?"--again his eyelid dropt at Ben.--
    "The Apostle Paul alone had wit, and he
    Was a most timorous fellow in bidding us
    Prostrate ourselves to worldly magistrates
    Against our conscience! I shall fry for this?
    I fear no bugbears or hobgoblins, sir,
    And would have all men not to be afraid
    Of roasting, toasting, pitch-forks, or the threats
    Of earthly ministers, tho' their mouths be stuffed
    With curses or with crusts of red-deer pie!
    One thing I will confess--if I must choose--
    Give me the Papists that can serve their God
    Not with your scraps, but solemn ceremonies,
    Organs, and singing men, and shaven crowns.
    Your protestant is a hypocritical ass!"

    "Profligate! You blaspheme!" Up started Bame,
    A little unsteady now upon his feet,
    And shaking his crumpled pamphlet over his head!

    "Nay--if your pie be done, you shall partake
    A second course. Be seated, sir, I pray.
    We atheists will pay the reckoning!
    I had forgotten that a Puritan
    Will swallow Moses like a red-deer pie
    Yet choke at a wax-candle! Let me read
    Your pamphlet. What, 'tis half addressed to me!
    Ogs-gogs! Ben! Hark to this--the Testament
    Of poor Rob Greene would cut Will Shakespeare off
    With less than his own Groatsworth! Hark to this!"
    And there, unseen by them, a quiet figure
    Entered the room and beckoning me for wine
    Seated himself to listen, Will himself,
    While Marlowe read aloud with knitted brows.
    "'_Trust them not; for there is an upstart crow
    Beautified with our feathers!_'
                                  --O, he bids
    All green eyes open:--'_And, being an absolute
    Johannes fac-totum is in his own conceit
    The only Shake-scene in a country!_'"
                                       "Feathers!"
    Exploded Ben. "Why, come to that, he pouched
    Your eagle's feather of blank verse, and lit
    His Friar Bacon's little magic lamp
    At the Promethean fire of Faustus. Jove,
    It was a faery buck, indeed, that Will
    Poached in that greenwood."
                                "Ben, see that you walk
    Like Adam, naked! Nay, in nakedness
    Adam was first. Trust me, you'll not escape
    This calumny! Vergil is damned--he wears
    A hen-coop round his waist, nicked in the night
    From Homer! Plato is branded for a thief,
    Why, he wrote Greek! And old Prometheus, too,
    Who stole his fire from heaven!"
                                   "Who printed it?"
    "Chettle! I know not why, unless he too
    Be one of those same dwarfs that find the world
    Too narrow for their jealousies. Ben, Ben,
    I tell thee 'tis the dwarfs that find no world
    Wide enough for their jostling, while the giants,
    The gods themselves, can in one tavern find
    Room wide enough to swallow the wide heaven
    With all its crowded solitary stars."

    "Why, then, the Mermaid Inn should swallow this,"
    The voice of Shakespeare quietly broke in,
    As laying a hand on either shoulder of Kit
    He stood behind him in the gloom and smiled
    Across the table at Ben, whose eyes still blazed
    With boyhood's generous wrath. "Rob was a poet.
    And had I known ... no matter! I am sorry
    He thought I wronged him. His heart's blood beats in this.
    Look, where he says he dies forsaken, Kit!"
    "Died drunk, more like," growled Ben. "And if he did,"
    Will answered, "none was there to help him home,
    Had not a poor old cobbler chanced upon him,
    Dying in the streets, and taken him to his house,
    And let him break his heart on his own bed.
    Read his last words. You know he left his wife
    And played the moth at tavern tapers, burnt
    His wings and dropt into the mud. Read here,
    His dying words to his forsaken wife,
    Written in blood, Ben, blood. Read it, '_I charge thee,
    Doll, by the love of our youth, by my soul's rest,
    See this man paid! Had he not succoured me
    I had died in the streets._' How young he was to call
    Thus on their poor dead youth, this withered shadow
    That once was Robin Greene. He left a child--
    See--in its face he prays her not to find
    The father's, but her own. '_He is yet green
    And may grow straight_,' so flickers his last jest,
    Then out for ever. At the last he begged
    A penny-pott of malmsey. In the bill,
    All's printed now for crows and daws to peck,
    You'll find four shillings for his winding sheet.
    He had the poet's heart and God help all
    Who have that heart and somehow lose their way
    For lack of helm, souls that are blown abroad
    By the great winds of passion, without power
    To sway them, chartless captains. Multitudes ply
    Trimly enough from bank to bank of Thames
    Like shallow wherries, while tall galleons,
    Out of their very beauty driven to dare
    The uncompassed sea, founder in starless nights,
    And all that we can say is--'They died drunk!'"

    "I have it from veracious witnesses,"
    Bame snuffled, "that the death of Robert Greene
    Was caused by a surfeit, sir, of Rhenish wine
    And pickled herrings. Also, sir, that his shirt
    Was very foul, and while it was at wash
    He lay i' the cobbler's old blue smock, sir!"
                                                "Gods,"
    The voice of Raleigh muttered nigh mine ear,
    "I had a dirty cloak once on my arm;
    But a Queen's feet had trodden it! Drawer, take
    Yon pamphlet, have it fried in cod-fish oil
    And bring it hither. Bring a candle, too,
    And sealing-wax! Be quick. The rogue shall eat it,
    And then I'll seal his lips."
                                  "No--not to-night,"
    Kit whispered, laughing, "I've a prettier plan
    For Master Bame."
                          "As for that scrap of paper,"
    The voice of Shakespeare quietly resumed,
    "Why, which of us could send his heart and soul
    Thro' Caxton's printing-press and hope to find
    The pretty pair unmangled. I'll not trust
    The spoken word, no, not of my own lips,
    Before the Judgment Throne against myself
    Or on my own defence; and I'll not trust
    The printed word to mirror Robert Greene.
    See--here's another Testament, in blood,
    Written, not printed, for the Mermaid Inn.
    Rob sent it from his death-bed straight to me.
    Read it. 'Tis for the Mermaid Inn alone;
    And when 'tis read, we'll burn it, as he asks."

    Then, from the hands of Shakespeare, Marlowe took
    A little scroll, and, while the winds without
    Rattled the shutters with their ghostly hands
    And wailed among the chimney-tops, he read:--

          Greeting to all the Mermaid Inn
          From their old Vice and Slip of Sin,
          Greeting, Ben, to you, and you
          Will Shakespeare and Kit Marlowe, too.
          Greeting from your Might-have-been,
          Your broken sapling, Robert Greene.

          Read my letter--'Tis my last,
          Then let Memory blot me out,
          I would not make my maudlin past
          A trough for every swinish snout.

      First, I leave a debt unpaid,
      It's all chalked up, not much all told,
      For Bread and Sack. When I am cold,
      Doll can pawn my Spanish blade
      And pay mine host. She'll pay mine'host!
      But ... I have chalked up other scores
      In your own hearts, behind the doors,
      Not to be paid so quickly. Yet,
      O, if you would not have my ghost
      Creeping in at dead of night,
      Out of the cold wind, out of the wet,
      With weeping face and helpless fingers
      Trying to wipe the marks away,
      Read what I can write, still write,
      While this life within them lingers.
      Let me pay, lads, let me pay.

      _Item_, for a peacock phrase,
      Flung out in a sudden blaze,
      Flung out at his friend Shake-scene,
      By this ragged Might-have-been,
      This poor Jackdaw, Robert Greene.

      Will, I knew it all the while!
      And you know it--and you smile!
      My quill was but a Jackdaw's feather,
      While the quill that Ben, there, wields,
      Fluttered down thro' azure fields,
      From an eagle in the sun;
      And yours, Will, yours, no earth-born thing,
      A plume of rainbow-tinctured grain,
      Dropt out of an angel's wing.
      Only a Jackdaw's feather mine,
      And mine ran ink, and Ben's ran wine,
      And yours the pure Pierian streams.

      But I had dreams, O, I had dreams!
      Dreams, you understand me, Will;
      And I fretted at the tether
      That bound me to the lowly plain,
      Gnawed my heart out, for I knew
      Once, tho' that was long ago,
      I might have risen with Ben and you
      Somewhere near that Holy Hill
      Whence the living rivers flow.
      Let it pass. I did not know
      One bitter phrase could ever fly
      So far through that immortal sky
      --Seeing all my songs had flown so low--
      One envious phrase that cannot die
      From century to century.

    Kit Marlowe ceased a moment, and the wind,
    As if indeed the night were all one ghost,
    Wailed round the Mermaid Inn, then sent once more
    Its desolate passion through the reader's voice:--

      Some truth there was in what I said.
      Kit Marlowe taught you half your trade;
      And something of the rest you learned
      From me,--but all you took you earned.
      You took the best I had to give,
      You took my clay and made it live;
      And that--why that's what God must do!--
      My music made for mortal ears
      You flung to all the listening spheres.
      You took my dreams and made them true.
      And, if I claimed them, the blank air
      Might claim the breath I shape to prayer.
      I do not claim it! Let the earth
      Claim the thrones she brings to birth.
      Let the first shapers of our tongue
      Claim whate'er is said or sung,
      Till the doom repeal that debt
      And cancel the first alphabet.
      Yet when, like a god, you scaled
      The shining crags where my foot failed;
      When I saw my fruit of the vine
      Foam in the Olympian cup,
      Or in that broader chalice shine
      Blood-red, a sacramental drink,
      With stars for bubbles, lifted up,
      Through the universal night,
      Up to the celestial brink,
      Up to that quintessential Light
      Where God acclaimed you for the wine
      Crushed from those poor grapes of mine;
      O, you'll understand, no doubt,
      How the poor vine-dresser fell,
      How a pin-prick can let out
      All the bannered hosts of hell,
      Nay, a knife-thrust, the sharp truth--
      I had spilt my wine of youth,
      The Temple was not mine to build.
      My place in the world's march was filled.

      Yet--through all the years to come--
      Men to whom my songs are dumb
      Will remember them and me
      For that one cry of jealousy,
      That curse where I had come to bless,
      That harsh voice of unhappiness.
      They'll note the curse, but not the pang,
      Not the torment whence it sprang,
      They'll note the blow at my friend's back,
      But not the soul stretched on the rack.
      They'll note the weak convulsive sting,
      Not the crushed body and broken wing.

      _Item_, for my thirty years,
      Dashed with sun and splashed with tears,
      Wan with revel, red with wine,
      This Jack-o-lanthorn life of mine.
      Other wiser, happier men,
      Take the full three-score-and-ten,
      Climb slow, and seek the sun.
      Dancing down is soon done.
      Golden boys, beware, beware,--
      The ambiguous oracles declare
      Loving gods for those that die
      Young, as old men may; but I,
      Quick as was my pilgrimage,
      Wither in mine April age.

            _Item_, one groatsworth of wit,
            Bought at an exceeding price,
            Ay, a million of repentance.
            Let me pay the whole of it.
            Lying here these deadly nights,
            Lads, for me the Mermaid lights
            Gleam as for a castaway
            Swept along a midnight sea
            The harbour-lanthorns, each a spark,
            A pin-prick in the solid dark,
            That lets trickle through a ray
            Glorious out of Paradise,
            To stab him with new agony.
            Let me pay, lads, let me pay!
            Let the Mermaid pass the sentence:
            I am pleading guilty now,
            A dead leaf on the laurel-bough,
            And the storm whirls me away.

    Kit Marlowe ceased; but not the wailing wind
    That round and round the silent Mermaid Inn
    Wandered, with helpless fingers trying the doors,
    Like a most desolate ghost.

                                  A sudden throng
    Of players bustled in, shaking the rain
    From their plumed hats. "Veracious witnesses,"
    The snuffle of Bame arose anew, "declare
    It was a surfeit killed him, Rhenish wine
    And pickled herrings. His shirt was very foul.
    He had but one. His doublet, too, was frayed,
    And his boots broken ..."

                            "What! Gonzago, you!"
    A short fat player called in a deep voice
    Across the room and, throwing aside his cloak
    To show the woman's robe he wore beneath,
    Minced up to Bame and bellowed--"'Tis such men
    As you that tempt us women to our fall!"
    And all the throng of players rocked and roared,
    Till at a nod and wink from Kit a hush
    Held them again.

                       "Look to the door," he said,
    "Is any listening?" The young player crept,
    A mask of mystery, to the door and peeped.
    "All's well! The coast is clear!"
                                      "Then shall we tell
    Our plan to Master Bame?"
                                    Round the hushed room
    Went Kit, a pen and paper in his hand,
    Whispering each to read, digest, and sign,
    While Ben re-filled the glass of Master Bame.
    "And now," said Kit aloud, "what think you, lads?
    Shall he be told?" Solemnly one or two
    'Gan shake their heads with "Safety! safety! Kit!"
    "O, Bame can keep a secret! Come, we'll tell him!
    He can advise us how a righteous man
    Should act! We'll let him share an he approve.
    Now, Master Bame,--come closer--my good friend,
    Ben Jonson here, hath lately found a way
    Of--hush! Come closer!--coining money, Bame."
    "Coining!" "Ay, hush, now! Hearken! A certain sure
    And indiscoverable method, sir!
    He is acquainted with one Poole, a felon
    Lately released from Newgate, hath great skill
    In mixture of metals--hush!--and, by the help
    Of a right cunning maker of stamps, we mean
    To coin French crowns, rose-nobles, pistolettes,
    Angels and English shillings."
                                  For one breath
    Bame stared at him with bulging beetle-eyes,
    Then murmured shyly as a country maid
    In her first wooing, "Is't not against the law?"
    "Why, sir, who makes the law? Why should not Bame
    Coin his own crowns like Queen Elizabeth?
    She is but mortal! And consider, too,
    The good works it should prosper in your hands,
    Without regard to red-deer pies and wine
    White as the Milky Way. Such secrets, Bame,
    Were not good for the general; but a few
    Discreet and righteous palms, your own, my friend,
    And mine,--what think you?"
                                With a hesitant glance
    Of well-nigh child-like cunning, screwing his eyes,
    Bame laughed a little huskily and looked round
    At that grave ring of anxious faces, all
    Holding their breath and thrilling his blunt nerves
    With their stage-practice. "And no risk?" breathed Bame,
    "No risk at all?" "O, sir, no risk at all!
    We make the very coins. Besides, that part
    Touches not you. Yours is the honest face,
    That's all we want."
                          "Why, sir, if you be sure
    There is no risk ..."
                          "You'll help to spend it. Good!
    We'll talk anon of this, and you shall carry
    More angels in your pocket, master Bame,
    Than e'er you'll meet in heaven. Set hand on seal
    To this now, master Bame, to prove your faith.
    Come, all have signed it. Here's the quill, dip, write.
    Good!"
            And Kit, pocketing the paper, bowed
    The gull to the inn-door, saying as he went,--
    "You shall hear further when the plan's complete.
    But there's one great condition--not one word,
    One breath of scandal more on Robert Greene.
    He's dead; but he was one of us. The day
    You air his shirt, I air this paper, too."
    No gleam of understanding, even then,
    Illumed that long white face: no stage, indeed,
    Has known such acting as the Mermaid Inn
    That night, and Bame but sniggered, "Why, of course,
    There's good in all men; and the best of us
    Will make mistakes."
                        "But no mistakes in this,"
    Said Kit, "or all together we shall swing
    At Tyburn--who knows what may leap to light?--
    You understand? No scandal!" "Not a breath!"
    So, in dead silence, Master Richard Bame
    Went out into the darkness and the night,
    To ask, as I have heard, for many a moon,
    The price of malmsey-butts and silken hose,
    And doublets slashed with satin.
                                      As the door
    Slammed on his back, the pent-up laughter burst
    With echo and re-echo round the room,
    But ceased as Will tossed on the glowing hearth
    The last poor Testament of Robert Greene.
    All watched it burn. The black wind wailed and moaned
    Around the Mermaid as the sparks flew up.
    "God, what a night for ships upon the sea,"
    Said Raleigh, peering through the wet black panes,
    "Well--we may thank Him for the Little Red Ring!"
    "_The Little Red Ring_," cried Kit, "_the Little Red Ring!_"
    Then up stood Dekker on the old black settle.
    "Give it a thumping chorus, lads," he called,
    And sang this brave song of the Mermaid Inn:--


    I

          Seven wise men on an old black settle,
            Seven wise men of the Mermaid Inn,
          Ringing blades of the one right metal,
            What is the best that a blade can win?
          Bread and cheese, and a few small kisses?
            Ha! ha! ha! Would you take them--you?
          --Ay, if Dame Venus would add to her blisses
            A roaring fire and a friend or two!

    _Chorus:_ Up now, answer me, tell me true!--
          --Ay, if the hussy would add to her blisses
            A roaring fire and a friend or two!


    II

          What will you say when the world is dying?
            What, when the last wild midnight falls
          Dark, too dark for the bat to be flying
            Round the ruins of old St. Paul's?
          What will be last of the lights to perish?
            What but the little red ring we knew,
          Lighting the hands and the hearts that cherish
            A fire, a fire, and a friend or two!

    _Chorus:_ Up now, answer me, tell me true!
          What will be last of the stars to perish?
            --The fire that lighteth a friend or two!


    III

          Up now, answer me, on your mettle
            Wisest man of the Mermaid Inn,
          Soberest man on the old black settle,
            Out with the truth! It was never a sin.--
          Well, if God saved me alone of the seven,
            Telling me _you_ must be damned, or _you_,
          "This," I would say, "This is hell, not heaven!
            Give me the fire and a friend or two!"

    _Chorus:_ Steel was never so ringing true:
          "God," we would say, "this is hell, not heaven!
            Give us the fire, and a friend or two!"


III

BLACK BILL'S HONEY-MOON

    The garlands of a Whitsun ale were strewn
    About our rushes, the night that Raleigh brought
    Bacon to sup with us. There, on that night,
    I saw the singer of the _Faërie Queen_
    Quietly spreading out his latest cantos
    For Shakespeare's eye, like white sheets in the sun.
    Marlowe, our morning-star, and Michael Drayton
    Talked in that ingle-nook. And Ben was there,
    Humming a song upon that old black settle:
             "Or leave a kiss but in the cup
             And I'll not ask for wine."
    But, meanwhile, he drank malmsey.
                                            Francis Bacon
    Straddled before the fire; and, all at once,
    He said to Shakespeare, in a voice that gripped
    The Mermaid Tavern like an arctic frost:

    "_There are no poets in this age of ours,
    Not to compare with Plautus. They are all
    Dead, the men that were famous in old days._"
    "Why--so they are," said Will. The humming stopped.
    I saw poor Spenser, a shy gentle soul,
    With haunted eyes like starlit forest pools,
    Smuggling his cantos under his cloak again.
    "There's verse enough, no doubt," Bacon went on,
    "But English is no language for the Muse.
    Whom would you call our best? There's Gabriel Harvey,
    And Edward, Earl of Oxford. Then there's Dyer,
    And Doctor Golding; while, for tragedy,
    Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, hath a lofty vein.
    And, in a lighter prettier vein, why, Will,
    There is _thyself!_ But--where's Euripides?"

    "Dead," echoed Ben, in a deep ghost-like voice.
    And drip--drip--drip--outside we heard the rain
    Miserably dropping round the Mermaid Inn.

    "Thy Summer's Night--eh, Will? Midsummer's Night?--
    That's a quaint fancy," Bacon droned anew,
    "But--Athens was an error, Will! Not Athens!
    Titania knew not Athens! Those wild elves
    Of thy Midsummer's Dream--eh? Midnight's Dream?--
    Are English all. Thy woods, too, smack of England;
    They never grew round Athens. Bottom, too,
    He is not Greek!"
                     "Greek?" Will said, with a chuckle,
    "Bottom a Greek? Why, no, he was the son
    Of Marian Hacket, the fat wife that kept
    An ale-house, Wincot-way. I lodged with her
    Walking from Stratford. You have never tramped
    Along that countryside? By Burton Heath?
    Ah, well, you would not know my fairylands.
    It warms my blood to let my home-spuns play
    Around your cold white Athens. There's a joy
    In jumping time and space."
                                     But, as he took
    The cup of sack I proffered, solemnly
    The lawyer shook his head. "Will, couldst thou use
    Thy talents with discretion, and obey
    Classic examples, those mightst match old Plautus,
    In all except priority of the tongue.
    This English tongue is only for an age,
    But Latin for all time. So I propose
    To embalm in Latin my philosophies.
    Well seize your hour! But, ere you die, you'll sail
    A British galleon to the golden courts
    Of Cleopatra."
                       "Sail it!" Marlowe roared,
    Mimicking in a fit of thunderous glee
    The drums and trumpets of his Tamburlaine:
    "And let her buccaneers bestride the sphinx,
    And play at bowls with Pharaoh's pyramids,
    And hale white Egypt with their tarry hands
    Home to the Mermaid! Lift the good old song
    That Rob Greene loved. Gods, how the lad would shout it!
    Stand up and sing, John Davis!"
                                       "Up!" called Raleigh,
    "Lift the chanty of Black Bill's Honey-moon, Jack!
    We'll keep the chorus going!"
                                     "Silence, all!"
    Ben Jonson echoed, rolling on his bench:
    "This gentle lawyer hath a longing, lads,
    To hear a right Homeric hymn. Now, Jack!
    But wet your whistle, first! A cup of sack
    For the first canto! Muscadel, the next!
    Canary for the last!" I brought the cup.
    John Davis emptied it at one mighty draught,
    Leapt on a table, stamped with either foot,
    And straight began to troll this mad sea-tale:


    CANTO THE FIRST

              Let Martin Parker at hawthorn-tide
                Prattle in Devonshire lanes,
              Let all his pedlar poets beside
                Rattle their gallows-chains,
              A tale like mine they never shall tell
                Or a merrier ballad sing,
              Till the Man in the Moon pipe up the tune
                And the stars play Kiss-in-the-Ring!

    _Chorus:_ Till Philip of Spain in England reign,
              And the stars play Kiss-in-the-Ring!

            All in the gorgeous dawn of day
              From grey old Plymouth Sound
            Our galleon crashed thro' the crimson spray
              To sail the world around:
            _Cloud i' the Sun_ was her white-scrolled name,--
              There was never a lovelier lass
            For sailing in state after pieces of eight
              With her bombards all of brass.

    _Chorus:_ Culverins, robinets, iron may-be;
              But her bombards all of brass!

            Now, they that go down to the sea in ships,
              Though piracy be their trade,
            For all that they pray not much with their lips
              They know where the storms are made:
            With the stars above and the sharks below,
              They need not parson or clerk;
            But our bo'sun Bill was an atheist still,
              Except--sometimes--in the dark!

    _Chorus:_ Now let Kit Marlowe mark!
            Our bo'sun Bill was an atheist still,
              Except--sometimes--in the dark!

            All we adventured for, who shall say,
              Nor yet what our port might be?--
            A magical city of old Cathay,
              Or a castle of Muscovy,
            With our atheist bo'sun, Bill, Black Bill,
              Under the swinging Bear,
            Whistling at night for a seaman to light
              His little poop-lanthorns there.

    _Chorus:_ On the deep, in the night, for a seaman to light
              His little lost lanthorns there.

            But, as over the Ocean-sea we swept,
              We chanced on a strange new land
            Where a valley of tall white lilies slept
              With a forest on either hand;
            A valley of white in a purple wood
              And, behind it, faint and far,
            Breathless and bright o'er the last rich height,
              Floated the sunset-star.

    _Chorus:_ Fair and bright o'er the rose-red height,
              Venus, the sunset-star.

            'Twas a marvel to see, as we beached our boat,
              Black Bill, in that peach-bloom air,
            With the great white lilies that reached to his throat
              Like a stained-glass bo'sun there,
            And our little ship's chaplain, puffing and red,
              A-starn as we onward stole,
            With the disk of a lily behind his head
              Like a cherubin's aureole.

    _Chorus:_ He was round and red and behind his head
              He'd a cherubin's aureole.

            "Hyrcania, land of honey and bees,
              We have found thee at last," he said,
            "Where the honey-comb swells in the hollow trees,"
              (O, the lily behind his head!)
            "The honey-comb swells in the purple wood!
              'Tis the swette which the heavens distil,
            Saith Pliny himself, on my little book-shelf!
              Is the world not sweet to thee, Bill?"

    _Chorus:_ "Saith Pliny himself, on my little book-shelf!
              Is the world not sweet to thee, Bill?"

            Now a man may taste of the devil's hot spice,
              And yet if his mind run back
            To the honey of childhood's Paradise
              His heart is not wholly black;
            And Bill, Black Bill, from the days of his youth,
              Tho' his chest was broad as an oak,
            Had cherished one innocent little sweet tooth,
              And it itched as our chaplain spoke.

    _Chorus:_ He had kept one perilous little tooth,
              And it itched as our chaplain spoke.

            All around was a mutter of bees,
              And Bill 'gan muttering too,--
            "If the honey-comb swells in the hollow trees,
              (What else can a Didymus do?)
            I'll steer to the purple woods myself
              And see if this thing be so,
            Which the chaplain found on his little book-shelf,
              For Pliny lived long ago."

    _Chorus:_ There's a platter of delf on his little book-shelf,
              And Pliny lived long ago.

            Scarce had he spoken when, out of the wood,
              And buffeting all around,
            Rooting our sea-boots where we stood,
              There rumbled a marvellous sound,
            As a mountain of honey were crumbling asunder,
              Or a sunset-avalanche hurled
            Honey-comb boulders of golden thunder
              To smother the old black world.

    _Chorus:_ Honey-comb boulders of musical thunder
              To mellow this old black world.

            And the chaplain he whispered--"This honey, one saith,
              On my camphired cabin-shelf,
            None may harvest on pain of death;
              For the bee would eat it himself!
            None walketh those woods but him whose voice
              In the dingles you then did hear!"
            "A VOICE?" growls Bill. "Ay, Bill, r-r-rejoice!
              'Twas the great Hyrcanian Bear!"

    _Chorus:_ Give thanks! _Re_-joice! 'Twas the glor-r-r-ious Voice
              Of the great Hyrcanian Bear!

             But, marking that Bill looked bitter indeed,
               For his sweet tooth hungered sore,
             "Consider," he saith, "that the Sweet hath need
               Of the Sour, as the Sea of the Shore!
             As the night to the day is our grief to our joy,
               And each for its brother prepares
             A banquet, Bill, that would otherwise cloy.
               Thus is it with honey and bears."

    _Chorus:_ Roses and honey and laughter would cloy!
              Give us thorns, too, and sorrow and bears!

             "Consider," he saith, "how by fretting a string
               The lutanist maketh sweet moan,
             And a bird ere it fly must have air for its wing
               To buffet or fall like a stone:
             Tho' you blacken like Pluto you make but more white
               These blooms which not Enna could yield!
             Consider, Black Bill, ere the coming of night,
                The lilies," he saith, "of the field."

    _Chorus:_ "Consider, Black Bill, in this beautiful light,
              The lilies," he saith, "of the field."

            "Consider the claws of a Bear," said Bill,
              "That can rip off the flesh from your bones,
            While his belly could cabin the skipper and still
              Accommodate Timothy Jones!
            Why, that's where a seaman who cares for his grog
              Perspires how this world isn't square!
            If there's _cause_ for a _cow_, if there's _use_ for a _dog_,
              By Pope John, there's no _Sense_ in a _Bear!_"

    _Chorus:_ Cause for a cow, use for a dog,
              By'r Lakin, no _Sense_ in a _Bear!_

            But our little ship's chaplain--"Sense," quoth he,
              "Hath the Bear tho' his making have none;
            For, my little book saith, by the sting of this bee
              Would Ursus be wholly foredone,
            But, or ever the hive he adventureth nigh
              And its crisp gold-crusted dome,
              He lardeth his nose and he greaseth his eye
              With a piece of an honey-comb."

    _Chorus:_ His velvety nose and his sensitive eye
               With a piece of an honey-comb.

            Black Bill at the word of that golden crust
              --For his ears had forgotten the roar,
            And his eyes grew soft with their innocent lust--
              'Gan licking his lips once more:
            "Be it bound like a missal and printed as fair,
              With capitals blue and red,
            'Tis a lie; for what honey could comfort a bear,
              Till the bear win the honey?" he said.

    _Chorus:_ "Ay, _whence_ the first honey wherewith the first bear
              First larded his nose?" he said.

            "Thou first metaphysical bo'sun, Bill,"
              Our chaplain quizzingly cried,
            "Wilt thou riddle me redes of a dumpling still
              With thy 'how came the apple inside'?"
            "Nay," answered Bill, "but I quest for truth,
              And I find it not on your shelf!
            I will face your Hyrcanian bear, forsooth,
              And look at his nose myself."

    _Chorus:_ For truth, for truth, or a little sweet tooth--
              I will into the woods myself.

            Breast-high thro' that foam-white ocean of bloom
              With its wonderful spokes of gold,
            Our sun-burnt crew in the rose-red gloom
              Like buccaneer galleons rolled:
            Breast-high, breast-high in the lilies we stood,
              And before we could say "good-night,"
            Out of the valley and into the wood
              He plunged thro' the last rich light.

    _Chorus:_ Out of the lilies and into the wood,
              Where the Great Bear walks all night!

            And our little ship's chaplain he piped thro' the trees
              As the moon rose, white and still,
            "Hylas, return to thy Heracles!"
              And we helped him with "Come back, Bill!"
              Thrice he piped it, thrice we halloo'd,
              And thrice we were dumb to hark;
            But never an answer came from the wood,
              So--we turned to our ship in the dark.

    _Chorus:_ Good-bye, Bill! you're a Didymus still;
              But--you're all alone in the dark.

            "This honey now"--as the first canto ceased,
            The great young Bacon pompously began--
            "Which Pliny calleth, as it were, the swette
            Of heaven, or spettle of the stars, is found
            In Muscovy. Now ..." "Bring the muscadel,"
            Ben Jonson roared--"'Tis a more purple drink,
            And suits with the next canto!"
                                              At one draught
            John Davis drained the cup, and with one hand
            Beating the measure, rapidly trolled again.


CANTO THE SECOND

                   Now, Rabelais, art thou quite foredone,
                   Dan Chaucer, Drayton, Every One!
                   Leave we aboard our _Cloud i' the Sun_
                     This crew of pirates dreaming--
                   Of Angels, minted in the blue
                   Like golden moons, Rose-nobles, too,
                   As under the silver-sliding dew
                     Our emerald creek lay gleaming!

    _Chorus:_   Under the stars lay gleaming!

                   And mailed with scales of gold and green
                   The high star-lilied banks between,
                   Nosing our old black hulk unseen,
                     Great alligators shimmered:
                   Blood-red jaws i' the blue-black ooze,
                   Where all the long warm day they snooze,
                   Chewing old cuds of pirate-crews,
                     Around us grimly glimmered.

    _Chorus:_   Their eyes like rubies glimmered.

                   Let us now sing of Bill, good sirs!
                   Follow him, all green forestéres,
                   Fearless of Hyrcanian bears
                     As of these ghostly lilies!
                   For O, not Drayton there could sing
                   Of wild Pigwiggen and his King
                   So merry a jest, so jolly a thing
                     As this my tale of Bill is.

    _Chorus:_   Into the woods where Bill is!

                   Now starts he as a white owl hoots,
                   And now he stumbles over roots,
                   And now beneath his big sea-boots
                     In yon deep glade he crunches
                   Black cakes of honey-comb that were
                   So elfin-sweet, perchance, last year;
                   But neither Bo'sun, now, nor Bear
                     At that dark banquet munches.

    _Chorus:_   Onward still he crunches!

                   Black cakes of honey-comb he sees
                   Above him in the forks of trees,
                   Filled by stars instead of bees,
                     With brimming silver glisten:
                   But ah, such food of gnome and fay
                   Could neither Bear nor Bill delay
                   Till where yon ferns and moonbeams play
                     He starts and stands to listen!

    _Chorus:_   What melody doth he listen?

                  Is it the Night-Wind as it comes
                   Through the wood and softly thrums
                   Silvery tabors, purple drums,
                     To speed some wild-wood revel?
                   Nay, Didymus, what faint sweet din
                   Of viol and flute and violin
                   Makes all the forest round thee spin,
                     The Night-Wind or the Devil?

    _Chorus:_   No doubt at all--the Devil!

                   He stares, with naked knife in hand,
                   This buccaneer in fairyland!
                   Dancing in a saraband
                     The red ferns reel about him!
                   Dancing in a morrice-ring
                   The green ferns curtsey, kiss and cling!
                   Their Marians flirt, their Robins fling
                     Their feathery heels to flout him!

    _Chorus:_   The whole wood reels about him.

                   Dance, ye shadows! O'er the glade,
                   Bill, the Bo'sun, undismayed,
                   Pigeon-toes with glittering blade!
                     Drake was never bolder!
                   Devil or Spaniard, what cares he
                   Whence your eerie music be?
                   Till--lo, against yon old oak-tree
                     He leans his brawny shoulder!

    _Chorus:_   He lists and leans his shoulder!

                   Ah, what melody doth he hear
                   As to that gnarled old tree-trunk there
                   He lays his wind-bit brass-ringed ear,
                     And steals his arm about it?
                   What Dryad could this Bo'sun win
                   To that slow-rippling amorous grin?--
                   'Twas full of singing bees within!
                     Not Didymus could doubt it!

    _Chorus:_   So loud they buzzed about it!

                   Straight, o'er a bough one leg he throws,
                   And up that oaken main-mast goes
                   With reckless red unlarded nose
                     And gooseberry eyes of wonder!
                   Till now, as in a galleon's hold,
                   Below, he sees great cells of gold
                   Whence all the hollow trunk up-rolled
                     A low melodious thunder.

    _Chorus:_   A sweet and perilous thunder!

                   Ay, there, within that hollow tree,
                   Will Shakespeare, mightst thou truly see
                   The Imperial City of the Bee,
                     In Chrysomelan splendour!
                   And, in the midst, one eight-foot dome
                   Swells o'er that Titan honey-comb
                   Where the Bee-Empress hath her home,
                     With such as do attend her,

    _Chorus:_   Weaponed with stings attend her!

                   But now her singing sentinels
                   Have turned to sleep in waxen cells,
                   And Bill leans down his face and smells
                     The whole sweet summer's cargo--
                   In one deep breath, the whole year's bloom,
                   Lily and thyme and rose and broom,
                   One Golden Fleece of flower-perfume
                     In that old oaken Argo.

    _Chorus:_   That green and golden Argo!

                   And now he hangs with dangling feet
                   Over that dark abyss of sweet,
                   Striving to reach such wild gold meat
                     As none could buy for money:
                   His left hand grips a swinging branch
                   When--crack! Our Bo'sun, stout and stanch,
                   Falls like an Alpine avalanche,
                     Feet first into the honey!

    _Chorus:_   Up to his ears in honey!

                   And now his red unlarded nose
                   And bulging eyes are all that shows
                   Above it, as he puffs and blows!
                     And now--to 'scape the scathing
                   Of that black host of furious bees
                   His nose and eyes he fain would grease
                   And bobs below those golden seas
                     Like an old woman bathing.

    _Chorus:_   Old Mother Hubbard bathing!

                   And now he struggles, all in vain,
                   To reach some little bough again;
                   But, though he heaves with might and main,
                     This honey holds his ribs, sirs,
                   So tight, a barque might sooner try
                   To steer a cargo through the sky
                   Than Bill, thus honey-logged, to fly
                     By flopping of his jib, sirs!

    _Chorus:_   His tops'l and his jib, sirs!

                   Like Oberon in the hive his beard
                   With wax and honey all besmeared
                   Would make the crescent moon afeard
                     That now is sailing brightly
                   Right o'er his leafy donjon-keep!
                   But that she knows him sunken deep,
                   And that his tower is straight and steep,
                     She would not smile so lightly.

    _Chorus:_   Look down and smile so lightly.

                   She smiles in that small heavenly space,
                   Ringed with the tree-trunk's leafy grace,
                   While upward grins his ghastly face
                     As if some wild-wood Satyr,
                   Some gnomish Ptolemy should dare
                   Up that dark optic tube to stare,
                   As all unveiled she floated there,
                     Poor maiden moon, straight at her!

    _Chorus:_   The buccaneering Satyr!

                   But there, till some one help him out,
                   Black Bill must stay, without a doubt.
                   "_Help! Help!_" he gives a muffled shout.
                     None but the white owls hear it!
                   _Who? Whoo?_ they cry: Bill answers "ME!
                   _I am stuck fast in this great tree!
                   Bring me a rope, good Timothy!
                     There's honey, lads, we'll share it!_"

    _Chorus:_   Ay, now he wants to share it.

                   Then, thinking help may come with morn,
                   He sinks, half-famished and out-worn,
                   And scarce his nose exalts its horn
                     Above that sea of glory!
                   But, even as he owns defeat,
                   His belly saith, "A man must eat,
                   And since there is none other meat,
                     Come, lap this mess before 'ee!"

    _Chorus:_   This glorious mess before 'ee.

                   Then Dian sees a right strange sight
                   As, bidding him a fond good-night,
                   She flings a silvery kiss to light
                     In that deep oak-tree hollow,
                   And finds that gold and crimson nose
                   A moving, munching, ravenous rose
                   That up and down unceasing goes,
                     Save when he stops to swallow!

    _Chorus:_   He finds it hard to swallow!

                   Ay, now his best becomes his worst,
                   For honey cannot quench his thirst,
                   Though he should eat until he burst;
                     But, ah, the skies are kindly,
                   And from their tender depths of blue
                   They send their silver-sliding dew.
                   So Bill thrusts out his tongue anew
                     And waits to catch it--blindly!

    _Chorus:_   For ah, the stars are kindly!

                   And sometimes, with a shower of rain,
                   They strive to ease their prisoner's pain:
                   Then Bill thrusts out his tongue again
                     With never a grace, the sinner!
                   And day and night and day goes by,
                   And never a comrade comes anigh,
                   And still the honey swells as high
                     For supper, breakfast, dinner!

    _Chorus:_   Yet Bill has grown no thinner!

                   The young moon grows to full and throws
                   Her buxom kiss upon his nose,
                   As nightly over the tree she goes,
                     And peeps and smiles and passes,
                   Then with her fickle silver flecks
                   Our old black galleon's dreaming decks;
                   And then her face, with nods and becks,
                     In midmost ocean glasses.

    _Chorus:_   'Twas ever the way with lasses!

                   Ah, Didymus, hast thou won indeed
                   That Paradise which is thy meed?
                   (Thy tale not all that run may read!)
                     Thy sweet hath now no leaven!
                   Now, like an onion in a cup
                   Of mead, thou liest for Jove to sup,
                   Could Polyphemus lift thee up
                     With Titan hands to heaven!

    _Chorus:_   This great oak-cup to heaven!

                 The second canto ceased; and, as they raised
                 Their wine-cups with the last triumphant note,
                 Bacon, undaunted, raised his grating voice--
                 "This honey which, in some sort, may be styled
                 The Spettle of the Stars ..." "Bring the Canary!"
                 Ben Jonson roared. "It is a moral wine
                 And suits the third, last canto!" At one draught
                 John Davis drained it and began anew.


CANTO THE THIRD

                   A month went by. We were hoisting sail!
                     We had lost all hope of Bill;
                   Though, laugh as you may at a seaman's tale,
                     He was fast in his honey-comb still!
                   And often he thinks of the chaplain's word
                     In the days he shall see no more,--
                   How the Sweet, indeed, of the Sour hath need;
                     And the Sea, likewise, of the Shore.

    _Chorus:_ The chaplain's word of the Air and a Bird;
                     Of the Sea, likewise, and the Shore!

                   "O, had I the wings of a dove, I would fly
                     To a heaven, of aloes and gall!
                   I have honeyed," he yammers, "my nose and mine eye,
                     And the bees cannot sting me at all!
                   And it's O, for the sting of a little brown bee,
                     Or to blister my hands on a rope,
                   Or to buffet a thundering broad-side sea
                     On a deck like a mountain-slope!"

    _Chorus:_ With her mast snapt short, and a list to port
                     And a deck like a mountain-slope.

                   But alas, and he thinks of the chaplain's voice
                     When that roar from the woods out-break--
                   _R-r-re-joice! R-r-re-joice!_ "Now, wherefore rejoice
                     In the music a bear could make?
                   'Tis a judgment, maybe, that I stick in this tree;
                     Yet in this I out-argued him fair!
                   Though I live, though I die, in this honey-comb pie,
                     By Pope Joan, there's no sense in a bear!"

    _Chorus:_ Notes in a nightingale, plums in a pie,
                     By'r Lakin, no _Sense_ in a _Bear_!

                   He knew not our anchor was heaved from the mud:
                     He was growling it over again,
                   When--a strange sound suddenly froze his blood,
                     And curdled his big slow brain!--
                   A marvellous sound, as of great steel claws
                     Gripping the bark of his tree,
                   Softly ascended! Like lightning ended
                     His honey-comb reverie!

    _Chorus:_ The honey-comb quivered! The little leaves shivered!
                     _Something was climbing the tree!_

                   Something that breathed like a fat sea-cook,
                     Or a pirate of fourteen ton!
                   But it clomb like a cat (tho' the whole tree shook)
                     Stealthily tow'rds the sun,
                   Till, as Black Bill gapes at the little blue ring
                     Overhead, which he calls the sky,
                   It is clean blotted out by a monstrous Thing
                     Which--_hath larded its nose and its eye._

    _Chorus:_ O, well for thee, Bill, that this monstrous Thing
                     Hath blinkered its little red eye.

                   Still as a mouse lies Bill with his face
                     Low down in the dark sweet gold,
                   While this monster turns round in the leaf-fringed space!
                     Then--taking a good firm hold,
                   As the skipper descending the cabin-stair,
                   Tail-first with a vast slow tread,
                   Solemnly, softly, cometh this Bear
                     Straight down o'er the Bo'sun's head.

    _Chorus:_ Solemnly--slowly--cometh this Bear,
                     Tail-first o'er the Bo'sun's head.

                   Nearer--nearer--then all Bill's breath
                     Out-bursts in one leap and yell!
                   And this Bear thinks, "Now am I gripped from beneath
                     By a roaring devil from hell!"
                   And madly Bill clutches his brown bow-legs,
                     And madly this Bear doth hale,
                   With his little red eyes fear-mad for the skies
                     And Bill's teeth fast in his tail!

    _Chorus:_   Small wonder a Bear should quail!
                   To have larded his nose, to have greased his eyes,
                     And be stung at the last in his tail.

                   Pull, Bo'sun! Pull, Bear! In the hot sweet gloom,
                     Pull Bruin, pull Bill, for the skies!
                   Pull--out of their gold with a bombard's boom
                     Come Black Bill's honeyed thighs!
                   Pull! Up! Up! Up! with a scuffle and scramble,
                     To that little blue ring of bliss,
                   This Bear doth go with our Bo'sun in tow
                     Stinging his tail, I wis.

    _Chorus:_ And this Bear thinks--"Many great bees I know,
                    But there never was Bee like this!"

                   All in the gorgeous death of day
                     We had slipped from our emerald creek,
                   And our _Cloud i' the Sun_ was careening away
                     With the old gay flag at the peak,
                   When, suddenly, out of the purple wood,
                     Breast-high thro' the lilies there danced
                   A tall lean figure, black as a nigger,
                     That shouted and waved and pranced!

    _Chorus:_ A gold-greased figure, but black as a nigger,
                    Waving his shirt as he pranced!

                   "'Tis Hylas! 'Tis Hylas!" our chaplain flutes,
                     And our skipper he looses a shout!
                   "'Tis Bill! Black Bill, in his old sea-boots!
                     _Stand by to bring her about!
                   Har-r-rd a-starboard!"_ And round we came,
                     With a lurch and a dip and a roll,
                   And a banging boom thro' the rose-red gloom
                     For our old Black Bo'sun's soul!

    _Chorus:_ Alive! Not dead! Tho' behind his head
                    He'd a seraphin's aureole!

          And our chaplain he sniffs, as Bill finished his tale,
            (With the honey still scenting his hair!)
          O'er a plate of salt beef and a mug of old ale--
            "By Pope Joan, there's no sense in a bear!"
          And we laughed, but our Bo'sun he solemnly growls
            --"Till the sails of yon heavens be furled,
          It taketh--now, mark!--all the beasts in the Ark,
            Teeth and claws, too, to make a good world!"

    Chorus: Till the great--blue--sails--be--furled,
           It taketh--now, mark!--all the beasts in the Ark,
             Teeth and claws, too, to make a good world!


           "Sack! Sack! Canary! Malmsey! Muscadel!"--
           As the last canto ceased, the Mermaid Inn
           Chorussed. I flew from laughing voice to voice;
           But, over all the hubbub, rose the drone
           Of Francis Bacon,--"Now, this Muscovy
           Is a cold clime, not favourable to bees
           (Or love, which is a weakness of the south)
           As well might be supposed. Yet, as hot lands
           Gender hot fruits and odoriferous spice,
           In this case we may think that honey and flowers
           Are comparable with the light airs of May
           And a more temperate region. Also we see,
           As Pliny saith, this honey being a swette
           Of heaven, a certain spettle of the stars,
           Which, gathering unclean vapours as it falls,
           Hangs as a fat dew on the boughs, the bees
           Obtain it partly thus, and afterwards
           Corrupt it in their stomachs, and at last
           Expel it through their mouths and harvest it
           In hives; yet, of its heavenly source it keeps
           A great part. Thus, by various principles
           Of natural philosophy we observe--"
           And, as he leaned to Drayton, droning thus,
           I saw a light gleam of celestial mirth
           Flit o'er the face of Shakespeare--scarce a smile--
           A swift irradiation from within
           As of a cloud that softly veils the sun.


IV

THE SIGN OF THE GOLDEN SHOE

    We had just set our brazier smouldering,
    To keep the Plague away. Many a house
    Was marked with the red cross. The bells tolled
    Incessantly. Nash crept into the room
    Shivering like a fragment of the night,
    His face yellow as parchment, and his eyes
    Burning.

             "The Plague! He has taken it!" voices cried.
    "That's not the Plague! The old carrion-crow is drunk;
    But stand away. What ails you, Nash my lad?"
    Then, through the clamour, as through a storm at sea,
    The master's voice, the voice of Ben, rang out,
    "Nash!"

            Ben leapt to his feet, and like a ship
    Shouldering the waves, he shouldered the throng aside.
    "What ails you, man? What's that upon your breast?
    Blood?"

            "Marlowe is dead," said Nash,
    And stunned the room to silence ...

                                        "Marlowe--dead!"
    Ben caught him by the shoulders. "Nash! Awake!
    What do you mean? Marlowe? Kit Marlowe? Dead?
    I supped with him--why--not three nights ago!
    You are drunk! You are dazed! There's blood upon your coat!"
    "That's--where he died," said Nash, and suddenly sank
    Sidelong across a bench, bowing his head
    Between his hands ...
    Wept, I believe. Then, like a whip of steel,
    His lean black figure sprang erect again.
    "Marlowe!" he cried, "Kit Marlowe, killed for a punk,
    A taffeta petticoat! Killed by an apple-squire!
    Drunk! I was drunk; but I am sober now,
    Sober enough, by God! Poor Kit is dead."

       *   *   *   *

    The Mermaid Inn was thronged for many a night
    With startled faces. Voices rose and fell,
    As I recall them, in a great vague dream,
    Curious, pitiful, angry, thrashing out
    The tragic truth. Then, all along the Cheape,
    The ballad-mongers waved their sheets of rhyme,
    Croaking: _Come buy! Come buy! The bloody death
    Of Wormall, writ by Master Richard Bame!
    Come buy! Come buy! The Atheist's Tragedy._
    And, even in Bread Street, at our very door,
    The crowder to his cracked old fiddle sang:--

                "_He was a poet of proud repute
                And wrote full many a play,
                Now strutting in a silken suit,
                Now begging by the way._"

    Then, out of the hubbub and the clash of tongues,
    The bawdy tales and scraps of balladry,
    (As out of chaos rose the slow round world)
    At last, though for the Mermaid Inn alone,
    Emerged some tragic semblance of a soul,
    Some semblance of the rounded truth, a world
    Glimpsed only through great mists of blood and tears,
    Yet smitten, here and there, with dreadful light,
    As I believe, from heaven.

                                Strangely enough,
    (Though Ben forgot his pipe and Will's deep eyes
    Deepened and softened, when they spoke of Kit,
    For many a month thereafter) it was Nash
    That took the blow like steel into his heart.
    Nash, our "Piers Penniless," whom Rob Greene had called
    "Young Juvenal," the first satirist of our age,
    Nash, of the biting tongue and subtle sneer,
    Brooded upon it, till his grief became
    Sharp as a rapier, ready to lunge in hate
    At all the lies of shallower hearts.

                                        One night,
    The night he raised the mists from that wild world,
    He talked with Chapman in the Mermaid Inn
    Of Marlowe's poem that was left half-sung,
    His _Hero and Leander_.

                                    "Kit desired,
    If he died first, that you should finish it,"
    Said Nash.

                A loaded silence filled the room
    As with the imminent spirit of the dead
    Listening. And long that picture haunted me:
    Nash, like a lithe young Mephistopheles
    Leaning between the silver candle-sticks,
    Across the oak table, with his keen white face,
    Dark smouldering eyes, and black, dishevelled hair;
    Chapman, with something of the steady strength
    That helms our ships, and something of the Greek,
    The cool clear passion of Platonic thought
    Behind the fringe of his Olympian beard
    And broad Homeric brows, confronting him
    Gravely.

             There was a burden of mystery
    Brooding on all that night; and, when at last
    Chapman replied, I knew he felt it, too.
    The curious pedantry of his wonted speech
    Was charged with living undertones, like truths
    Too strange and too tremendous to be breathed
    Save thro' a mask. And though, in lines that flamed
    Once with strange rivalry, Shakespeare himself defied
    Chapman, that spirit "by spirits taught to write
    Above a mortal pitch," Will's nimbler sense
    Was quick to breathings from beyond our world
    And could not hold them lightly.

                                    "Ah, then Kit,"
    Said Chapman, "had some prescience of his end,
    Like many another dreamer. What strange hints
    Of things past, present, and to come, there lie
    Sealed in the magic pages of that music
    Which, laying strong hold on universal laws,
    Ranges beyond these mud-walls of the flesh,
    Though dull wits fail to follow. It was this
    That made men find an oracle in the books
    Of Vergil, and an everlasting fount
    Of science in the prophets."

                                Once again
    That haunted silence filled the shadowy room;
    And, far away up Bread Street, we could hear
    The crowder, piping of black Wormall still:--

         "_He had a friend, once gay and green,
            Who died of want alone,
         In whose black fate he might have seen
           The warning of his own._"

    "Strange he should ask a hod-man like myself
    To crown that miracle of his April age,"
    Said Chapman, murmuring softly under breath,
    "_Amorous Leander, beautiful and young_ ...
    Why, Nash, had I been only charged to raise
    Out of its grave in the green Hellespont
    The body of that boy,
    To make him sparkle and leap thro' the cold waves
    And fold young Hero to his heart again,
    The task were scarce as hard.
                                 But ... stranger still,"--
    And his next words, although I hardly knew
    All that he meant, went tingling through my flesh--
    "Before you spoke, before I knew his wish,
    I had begun to write!
                           I knew and loved
    His work. Himself I hardly knew at all;
    And yet--I know him now! I have heard him now
    And, since he pledged me in so rare a cup,
    I'll lift and drink to him, though lightnings fall
    From envious gods to scourge me. I will lift
    This cup in darkness to the soul that reigns
    In light on Helicon. Who knows how near?
    For I have thought, sometimes, when I have tried
    To work his will, the hand that moved my pen
    Was mine, and yet--not mine. The bodily mask
    Is mine, and sometimes, dull as clay, it sleeps
    With old Musæus. Then strange flashes come,
    Oracular glories, visionary gleams,
    And the mask moves, not of itself, and sings."

    "I know that thought," said Nash. "A mighty ship,
    A lightning-shattered wreck, out in that night,
    Unseen, has foundered thundering. We sit here
    Snug on the shore, and feel the wash of it,
    The widening circles running to our feet.
    Can such a soul go down to glut the sharks
    Without one ripple? Here comes one sprinkle of spray.
    Listen!" And through that night, quick and intense,
    And hushed for thunder, tingled once again,
    Like a thin wire, the crowder's distant tune:--

         "_Had he been prenticed to the trade
           His father followed still,
         This exit he had never made,
           Nor played a part so ill._"

    "Here is another," said Nash, "I know not why;
    But like a weed in the long wash, I too
    Was moved, not of myself, to a tune like this.
    O, I can play the crowder, fiddle a song
    On a dead friend, with any the best of you.
    Lie and kick heels in the sun on a dead man's grave
    And yet--God knows--it is the best we can;
    And better than the world's way, to forget."
    So saying, like one that murmurs happy words
    To torture his own grief, half in self-scorn,
    He breathed a scrap of balladry that raised
    The mists a moment from that Paradise,
    That primal world of innocence, where Kit
    In childhood played, outside his father's shop,
    Under the sign of the _Golden Shoe_, as thus:--

        A cobbler lived in Canterbury
        --He is dead now, poor soul!--
        He sat at his door and stitched in the sun,
        Nodding and smiling at everyone;
        For St. Hugh makes all good cobblers merry,
        And often he sang as the pilgrims passed,
        "I can hammer a soldier's boot,
        And daintily glove a dainty foot.
        Many a sandal from my hand
        Has walked the road to Holy Land.
        Knights may fight for me, priests may pray for me,
        Pilgrims walk the pilgrim's way for me,
        I have a work in the world to do!
        --_Trowl the bowl, the nut-brown bowl,
              To good St. Hugh!_--
        The cobbler must stick to his last."

        And anon he would cry
        "Kit! Kit! Kit!" to his little son,
        "Look at the pilgrims riding by!
        Dance down, hop down, after them, run!"
        Then, like an unfledged linnet, out
        Would tumble the brave little lad,
        With a piping shout,--
        "O, look at them, look at them, look at them, Dad!
        Priest and prioress, abbot and friar,
        Soldier and seaman, knight and squire!
        How many countries have they seen?
        Is there a king there, is there a queen
        Dad, one day,
        Thou and I must ride like this,
        All along the Pilgrim's Way,
        By Glastonbury and Samarcand,
        El Dorado and Cathay,
        London and Persepolis,
        All the way to Holy Land!"

          Then, shaking his head as if he knew,
        Under the sign of the _Golden Shoe_,
        Touched by the glow of the setting sun,
        While the pilgrims passed,
        The little cobbler would laugh and say:
        "When you are old you will understand
        'Tis a very long way
        To Samarcand!
        Why, largely to exaggerate
        Befits not men of small estate,
        But--I should say, yes, I should say,
        'Tis a hundred miles from where you stand;
        And a hundred more, my little son,
        A hundred more, to Holy Land!...
        I have a work in the world to do
        --_Trowl the bowl, the nut-brown bowl,
                      To good St. Hugh!_--
        The cobbler must stick to his last."

    "Which last," said Nash, breaking his rhyme off short,
    "The crowder, after his kind, would seem to approve.
    Well--all the waves from that great wreck out there
    Break, and are lost in one withdrawing sigh:

        The little lad that used to play
          Around the cobbler's door,
        Kit Marlowe, Kit Marlowe,
          We shall not see him more.

    But--could I tell you how that galleon sank,
    Could I but bring you to that hollow whirl,
    The black gulf in mid-ocean, where that wreck
    Went thundering down, and round it hell still roars,
    That were a tale to snap all fiddle-strings."
    "Tell me," said Chapman.

                             "Ah, you wondered why,"
    Said Nash, "you wondered why he asked your help
    To crown that work of his. Why, Chapman, think,
    Think of the cobbler's awl--there's a stout lance
    To couch at London, there's a conquering point
    To carry in triumph through Persepolis!
    I tell you Kit was nothing but a child,
    When some rich patron of the _Golden Shoe_
    Beheld him riding into Samarcand
    Upon a broken chair, the which he said
    Was a white steed, splashed with the blood of kings.
      When, on that patron's bounty, he did ride
    So far as Cambridge, he was a brave lad,
    Untamed, adventurous, but still innocent,
    O, innocent as the cobbler's little self!
    He brought to London just a bundle and stick,
    A slender purse, an Ovid, a few scraps
    Of song, and all unshielded, all unarmed
    A child's heart, packed with splendid hopes and dreams.
    I say a child's heart, Chapman, and that phrase
    Crowns, not dis-crowns, his manhood.
                                    Well--he turned
    An honest penny, taking some small part
    In plays at the _Red Bull_. And, all the while,
    Beyond the paint and tinsel of the stage,
    Beyond the greasy cock-pit with its reek
    Of orange-peel and civet, as all of these
    Were but the clay churned by the glorious rush
    Of his white chariots and his burning steeds,
    Nay, as the clay were a shadow, his great dreams,
    Like bannered legions on some proud crusade,
    Empurpling all the deserts of the world,
    Swept on in triumph to the glittering towers
    Of his abiding City.
                        Then--he met
    That damned blood-sucking cockatrice, the pug
    Of some fine strutting mummer, one of those plagues
    Bred by our stage, a puff-ball on the hill
    Of Helicon. As for his wench--she too
    Had played so many parts that she forgot
    The cue for truth. King Puff had taught her well.
    He was the vainer and more foolish thing,
    She the more poisonous.
                              One dark day, to spite
    Archer, her latest paramour, a friend
    And apple-squire to Puff, she set her eyes
    On Marlowe ... feigned a joy in his young art,
    Murmured his songs, used all her London tricks
    To coney-catch the country greenhorn. Man,
    Kit never even _saw_ her painted face!
    He pored on books by candle-light and saw
    Everything thro' a mist. O, I could laugh
    To think of it, only--his up-turned skull
    There, in the dark, now that the flesh drops off,
    Has laughed enough, a horrible silent laugh,
    To think his Angel of Light was, after all,
    Only the red-lipped Angel of the Plague.
    He was no better than the rest of us,
    No worse. He felt the heat. He felt the cold.
    He took her down to Deptford to escape
    Contagion, and the crashing of sextons' spades
    On dead men's bones in every churchyard round;
    The jangling bell and the cry, _Bring out your dead_.
    And there she told him of her luckless life,
    Wedded, deserted, both against her will,
    A luckless Eve that never knew the snake.
    True and half-true she mixed in one wild lie,
    And then--she caught him by the hand and wept.
    No death-cart passed to warn him with its bell.
    Her eyes, her perfumed hair, and her red mouth,
    Her warm white breast, her civet-scented skin,
    Swimming before him, in a piteous mist,
    Made the lad drunk, and--she was in his arms;
    And all that God had meant to wake one day
    Under the Sun of Love, suddenly woke
    By candle-light and cried, 'The Sun; The Sun!'
    And he believed it, Chapman, he believed it!
    He was a cobbler's son, and he believed
    In Love! Blind, through that mist, he caught at Love,
    The everlasting King of all this world.

    Kit was not clever. Clever men--like Pomp--
    Might jest. And fools might laugh. But when a man,
    Simple as all great elemental things,
    Makes his whole heart a sacrificial fire
    To one whose love is in her supple skin,
    There comes a laughter in which jests break up
    Like icebergs in a sea of burning marl.
    Then dreamers turn to murderers in an hour.
    Then topless towers are burnt, and the Ocean-sea
    Tramples the proud fleet, down, into the dark,
    And sweeps over it, laughing. Come and see,
    The heart now of this darkness--no more waves,
    But the black central hollow where that wreck
    Went down for ever.
                          How should Piers Penniless
    Brand that wild picture on the world's black heart?--
    Last night I tried the way of the Florentine,
    And bruised myself; but we are friends together
    Mourning a dead friend, none will ever know!--
    Kit, do you smile at poor Piers Penniless,
    Measuring it out? Ah, boy, it is my best!
    Since hearts must beat, let it be _terza rima_,
    A ladder of rhyme that two sad friends alone
    May let down, thus, to the last circle of hell."

    So saying, and motionless as a man in trance,
    Nash breathed the words that raised the veil anew,
    Strange intervolving words which, as he spake them,
    Moved like the huge slow whirlpool of that pit
    Where the wreck sank, the serpentine slow folds
    Of the lewd Kraken that sucked it, shuddering, down:--

    This is the Deptford Inn. Climb the dark stair.
      Come, come and see Kit Marlowe lying dead!
    See, on the table, by that broken chair,

    The little phials of paint--the white and red.
      A cut-lawn kerchief hangs behind the door,
    Left by his punk, even as the tapster said.

    There is the gold-fringed taffeta gown she wore,
      And, on that wine-stained bed, as is most meet,
    He lies alone, never to waken more.

    O, still as chiselled marble, the frayed sheet
      Folds the still form on that sepulchral bed,
    Hides the dead face, and peaks the rigid feet.

    Come, come and see Kit Marlowe lying dead!
      Draw back the sheet, ah, tenderly lay bare
    The splendour of that Apollonian head;

    The gloriole of his flame-coloured hair;
      The lean athletic body, deftly planned
    To carry that swift soul of fire and air;

    The long thin flanks, the broad breast, and the grand
      Heroic shoulders! Look, what lost dreams lie
    Cold in the fingers of that delicate hand;

    And, shut within those lyric lips, what cry
      Of unborn beauty, sunk in utter night,
    Lost worlds of song, sealed in an unknown sky,

    Never to be brought forth, clothed on with light.
      Was this, then, this the secret of his song?--
    _Who ever loved that loved not at first?_

    It was not Love, not Love, that wrought this wrong;
      And yet--what evil shadow of this dark town
    Could quench a soul so flame-like clean and strong,

    Strike the young glory of his manhood down,
      Dead, like a dog, dead in a drunken brawl,
    Dead for a phial of paint, a taffeta gown?

    What if his blood were hot?   High over all
      He heard, as in his song the world still hears,
    Those angels on the burning heavenly wall

    Who chant the thunder-music of the spheres.
      Yet--through the glory of his own young dream
    Here did he meet that face, wet with strange tears,

    Andromeda, with piteous face astream,
      Hailing him, Perseus. In her treacherous eyes
    As in dark pools the mirrored stars will gleam,

    Here did he see his own eternal skies;
      And here--she laughed, nor found the dream amiss;
    But bade him pluck and eat--in Paradise.

    Here did she hold him, broken up with bliss,
      Here, like a supple snake, around him coiled,
    Here did she pluck his heart out with a kiss,

    Here were the wings clipped and the glory soiled,
      Here adders coupled in the pure white shrine,
    Here was the Wine spilt, and the Shew-bread spoiled.

    Black was that feast, though he who poured the Wine
      Dreamed that he poured it in high sacrament.
    Deep in her eyes he saw his own eyes shine,

    Beheld Love's god-head and was well content.
      Subtly her hand struck the pure silver note,
    The throbbing chord of passion that God meant

    To swell the bliss of heaven. Round his young throat
      She wound her swarthy tresses; then, with eyes
    Half mad to see their power, half mad to gloat,

    Half mad to batten on their own devilries,
      And mark what heaven-born splendours they could quell,
    She held him quivering in a mesh of lies,

    And in soft broken speech began to tell--
      There as, against her heart, throbbing he lay--
    The truth that hurled his soul from heaven to hell.

    Quivering, she watched the subtle whip-lash flay
      The white flesh of the dreams of his pure youth;
    Then sucked the blood and left them cold as clay.

    Luxuriously she lashed him with the truth.
      Against his mouth her subtle mouth she set
    To show, as through a mask, O, without ruth,

    As through a cold clay mask (brackish and wet
      With what strange tears!) it was not his, not his,
    The kiss that through his quivering lips she met.

    Kissing him, "_Thus_," she whispered, "_did he kiss.
      Ah, is the sweetness like a sword, then, sweet?
    Last night--ah, kiss again--aching with bliss,_

    _Thus was I made his own, from head to feet._"
      --A sudden agony thro' his body swept
    Tempestuously.--"_Our wedded pulses beat_

    _Like this and this; and then, at dawn, he slept._"
      She laughed, pouting her lips against his cheek
    To drink; and, as in answer, Marlowe wept.

    As a dead man in dreams, he heard her speak.
      Clasped in the bitter grave of that sweet clay,
    Wedded and one with it, he moaned. Too weak

    Even to lift his head, sobbing, he lay,
      Then, slowly, as their breathings rose and fell,
    He felt the storm of passion, far away,

    Gather. The shuddering waves began to swell.
      And, through the menace of the thunder-roll,
    The thin quick lightnings, thrilling through his hell,

    Lightnings that hell itself could not control
      (Even while she strove to bow his neck anew)
    Woke the great slumbering legions of his soul.

    Sharp was that severance of the false and true,
      Sharp as a sword drawn from a shuddering wound.
    But they, that were one flesh, were cloven in two.

    Flesh leapt from clasping flesh, without a sound.
      He plucked his body from her white embrace,
    And cast him down, and grovelled on the ground.

    Yet, ere he went, he strove once more to trace,
      Deep in her eyes, the loveliness he knew;
    Then--spat his hatred into her smiling face.

    She clung to him. He flung her off. He drew
      His dagger, thumbed the blade, and laughed--"Poor punk!
    What? Would you make me your own murderer, too?"

       *   *   *   *

      "That was the day of our great feast," said Nash,
    "Aboard the _Golden Hynde_. The grand old hulk
    Was drawn up for the citizens' wonderment
    At Deptford. Ay, Piers Penniless was there!
    Soaked and besotted as I was, I saw
    Everything. On her poop the minstrels played,
    And round her sea-worn keel, like meadow-sweet
    Curtseying round a lightning-blackened oak,
    Prentices and their sweethearts, heel and toe,
    Danced the brave English dances, clean and fresh
    As May.
            But in her broad gun-guarded waist
    Once red with British blood, long tables groaned
    For revellers not so worthy. Where her guns
    Had raked the seas, barrels of ale were sprung,
    Bestrid by roaring tipplers. Where at night
    The storm-beat crew silently bowed their heads
    With Drake before the King of Life and Death,
    A strumpet wrestled with a mountebank
    For pence, a loose-limbed Lais with a clown
    Of Cherry Hilton. Leering at their lewd twists,
    Cross-legged upon the deck, sluggish with sack,
    Like a squat toad sat Puff ...
    Propped up against the bulwarks, at his side,
    Archer, his apple-squire, hiccoughed a bawdy song.
    Suddenly, through that orgy, with wild eyes,
    Yet with her customary smile, O, there
    I saw in daylight what Kit Marlowe saw
    Through blinding mists, the face of his first love.
    She stood before her paramour on the deck,
    Cocking her painted head to right and left,
    Her white teeth smiling, but her voice a hiss:
    'Quickly,' she said to Archer, 'come away,
    Or there'll be blood spilt!'
                                 'Better blood than wine,'
    Said Archer, struggling to his feet, 'but who,
    Who would spill blood?'
                             'Marlowe!' she said.
                                                 Then Puff
    Reeled to his feet. 'What, Kit, the cobbler's son?
    The lad that broke his leg at the _Red Bull_,
    Tamburlaine-Marlowe, he that would chain kings
    To's chariot-wheel? What, is he rushing hither?
    He would spill blood for Gloriana, hey?
    O, my Belphoebe, you will crack my sides!
    Was this the wench that shipped a thousand squires?
    O, ho! But here he comes. Now, solemnly, lads,--
    _Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven
    To entertain divine Zenocrate!_'
    And there stood Kit, high on the storm-scarred poop,
    Against the sky, bare-headed. I saw his face,
    Pale, innocent, just the dear face of that boy
    Who walked to Cambridge with a bundle and stick,--
    The little cobbler's son. Yet--there I caught
    My only glimpse of how the sun-god looked,
    And only for one moment.
                                   When he saw
    His mistress, his face whitened, and he shook.
    Down to the deck he came, a poor weak man;
    And yet--by God--the only man that day
    In all our drunken crew.
                                  'Come along, Kit,'
    Cried Puff, 'we'll all be friends now, all take hands,
    And dance--ha! ha!--the shaking of the sheets!'
    Then Archer, shuffling a step, raised his cracked voice
    In Kit's own song to a falsetto tune,
    Snapping one hand, thus, over his head as he danced:--

              '_Come, live with me, and be my love,
              And we will all the pleasures prove!_' ...

    Puff reeled between, laughing. 'Damn you,' cried Kit,
    And, catching the fat swine by his round soft throat,
    Hurled him headlong, crashing across the tables,
    To lie and groan in the red bilge of wine
    That washed the scuppers.
                              Kit gave him not one glance.
    'Archer,' he said in a whisper.
                                    Instantly
    A long thin rapier flashed in Archer's hand.
    The ship was one wild uproar. Women screamed
    And huddled together. A drunken clamorous ring
    Seethed around Marlowe and his enemy.
    Kit drew his dagger, slowly, and I knew
    Blood would be spilt.
                          'Here, take my rapier, Kit!'
    I cried across the crowd, seeing the lad
    Was armed so slightly. But he did not hear.
    I could not reach him.
                            All at once he leapt
    Like a wounded tiger, past the rapier point
    Straight at his enemy's throat. I saw his hand
    Up-raised to strike! I heard a harlot's scream,
    And, in mid-air, the hand stayed, quivering, white,
    A frozen menace.
                      I saw a yellow claw
    Twisting the dagger out of that frozen hand;
    I saw his own steel in that yellow grip,
    His own lost lightning raised to strike at him!
    I saw it flash! I heard the driving grunt
    Of him that struck! Then, with a shout, the crowd
    Sundered, and through the gap, a blank red thing
    Streaming with blood came the blind face of Kit,
    Reeling, to me! And I, poor drunken I,
    Held my arms wide for him. Here, on my breast,
    With one great sob, he burst his heart and died."

       *   *   *   *

    Nash ceased. And, far away down Friday Street,
    The crowder with his fiddler wailed again:

      "_Blaspheming Tambolin must die
        And Faustus meet his end.
      Repent, repent, or presentlie
        To hell ye must descend._"

    And, as in answer, Chapman slowly breathed
    Those mightiest lines of Marlowe's own despair:

      "_Think'st thou that I who saw the face of God,
      And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
      Am not tormented with ten thousand hells?_"

    "Ah, you have said it," said Nash, "and there you know
    Why Kit desired your hand to crown his work.
    He reverenced you as one whose temperate eyes
    Austere and grave, could look him through and through;
    One whose firm hand could grasp the reins of law
    And guide those furious horses of the sun,
    As Ben and Will can guide them, where you will.
    His were, perchance, the noblest steeds of all,
    And from their nostrils blew a fierier dawn
    Above the world. That glory is his own;
    But where he fell, he fell. Before his hand
    Had learned to quell them, he was dashed to the earth.
    'Tis yours to show that good men honoured him.
    For, mark this, Chapman, since Kit Marlowe fell.
    There will be fools that, in the name of Art,
    Will wallow in the mire, crying 'I fall,
    I fall from heaven!'--fools that have only heard
    From earth, the rumour of those golden hooves
    Far, far above them. Yes, you know the kind,
    The fools that scorn Will for his lack of fire
    Because he quells the storms they never knew,
    And rides above the thunder; fools of Art
    That skip and vex, like little vicious fleas,
    Their only Helicon, some green madam's breast.
    Art! Art! O, God, that I could send my soul,
    In one last wave, from that night-hidden wreck,
    Across the shores of all the years to be;
    O, God, that like a crowder I might shake
    Their blind dark casements with the pity of it,
    Piers Penniless his ballad, a poor scrap,
    That but for lack of time, and hope and pence,
    He might have bettered! For a dead man's sake,
    Thus would the wave break, thus the crowder cry:--

      Dead, like a dog upon the road;
        Dead, for a harlot's kiss;
      The Apollonian throat and brow,
      The lyric lips, so silent now,
      The flaming wings that heaven bestowed
        For loftier airs than this!

      The sun-like eyes whose light and life
        Had gazed an angel's down,
      That burning heart of honey and fire,
      Quenched and dead for an apple-squire,
      Quenched at the thrust of a mummer's knife,
        Dead--for a taffeta gown!

      The wine that God had set apart,
        The noblest wine of all,
      Wine of the grapes that angels trod,
      The vintage of the glory of God,
      The crimson wine of that rich heart,
        Spilt in a drunken brawl,

      Poured out to make a steaming bath
        That night in the Devil's Inn,
      A steaming bath of living wine
      Poured out for Circe and her swine,
      A bath of blood for a harlot
        To supple and sleek her skin.

      And many a fool that finds it sweet
        Through all the years to be,
      Crowning a lie with Marlowe's fame,
      Will ape the sin, will ape the shame,
      Will ape our captain in defeat;
        But--not in victory;

      Till Art become a leaping-house,
        And Death be crowned as Life,
      And one wild jest outshine the soul
      Of Truth ... O, fool, is this your goal?
      You are not our Kit Marlowe,
        But the drunkard with the knife;

      Not Marlowe, but the Jack-o'-Lent
        That lured him o'er the fen!
      O, ay, the tavern is in its place,
      And the punk's painted smiling face,
      But where is our Kit Marlowe
        The man, the king of men?

      Passion? You kiss the painted mouth,
        The hand that clipped his wings,
      The hand that into his heart she thrust
      And tuned him to her whimpering lust,
      And played upon his quivering youth
        As a crowder plucks the strings.

      But he who dared the thunder-roll,
        Whose eagle-wings could soar,
      Buffeting down the clouds of night,
      To beat against the Light of Light,
      That great God-blinded eagle-soul,
        We shall not see him, more."


V

THE COMPANION OF A MILE

THWACK! _Thwack_! One early dawn upon our door I heard the bladder of
some motley fool Bouncing, and all the dusk of London shook With bells!
I leapt from bed,--had I forgotten?--I flung my casement wide and craned
my neck Over the painted Mermaid. There he stood, His right leg yellow
and his left leg blue, With jingling cap, a sheep-bell at his tail,
Wielding his eel-skin bladder,--_bang! thwack! bang!_--Catching a
comrade's head with the recoil And skipping away! All Bread Street dimly
burned Like a reflected sky, green, red and white With littered
branches, ferns and hawthorn-clouds; For, round Sir Fool, a frolic
morrice-troop Of players, poets, prentices, mad-cap queans, Robins and
Marians, coloured like the dawn, And sparkling like the greenwood whence
they came With their fresh boughs all dewy from the dark, Clamoured,
_Come down! Come down, and let us in!_ High over these, I suddenly saw
Sir Fool Leap to a sign-board, swing to a conduit-head, And perch there,
gorgeous on the morning sky, Tossing his crimson cockscomb to the blue
And crowing like Chanticleer, _Give them a rouse! Tickle it, tabourer!
Nimbly, lasses, nimbly! Tuck up your russet petticoats and dance! Let
the Cheape know it is the first of May!_

And as I seized shirt, doublet and trunk-hose, I saw the hobby-horse
come cantering down, A pasteboard steed, dappled a rosy white Like
peach-bloom, bridled with purple, bitted with gold, A crimson foot-cloth
on his royal flanks, And, riding him, His Majesty of the May! Round him
the whole crowd frolicked with a shout, And as I stumbled down the
crooked stair I heard them break into a dance and sing:--


SONG

    I

      Into the woods we'll trip and go,
      Up and down and to and fro,
      Under the moon to fetch in May,
      And two by two till break of day,
              A-maying,
              A-playing,
      For Love knows no gain-saying!
      Wisdom trips not? Even so--
      Come, young lovers, trip and go,
              Trip and go.


    II

      Out of the woods we'll dance and sing
      Under the morning-star of Spring,
      Into the town with our fresh boughs
      And knock at every sleeping house,
              Not sighing,
              Or crying,
      Though Love knows no denying!
      Then, round your summer queen and king,
      Come, young lovers, dance and sing,
              Dance and sing!

    "_Chorus_," the great Fool tossed his gorgeous crest,
    And lustily crew against the deepening dawn,
    "_Chorus_," till all the Cheape caught the refrain,
    And, with a double thunder of frolic feet,
    Its ancient nut-brown tabors woke the Strand:--

            A-maying,
            A-playing,
    For Love knows no gain-saying!
    Wisdom trips not? Even so,--
    Come, young lovers, trip and go,
            Trip and go.

    Into the Mermaid with a shout they rushed
    As I shot back the bolts, and _bang, thwack, bang,_
    The bladder bounced about me. What cared I?
    This was all England's holy-day! "Come in,
    My yellow-hammers," roared the Friar Tuck
    Of this mad morrice, "come you into church,
    My nightingales, my scraps of Lincoln green,
    And hear my sermon!" On a window-seat
    He stood, against the diamonded rich panes
    In the old oak parlour and, throwing back his hood,
    Who should it be but Ben, rare Ben himself?
    The wild troup laughed around him, some a-sprawl
    On tables, kicking parti-coloured heels,
    Some with their Marians jigging on their knees,
    And, in the front of all, the motley fool
    Cross-legged upon the rushes.
                                  O, I knew him,--
    Will Kemp, the player, who danced from London town
    To Norwich in nine days and was proclaimed
    Freeman of Marchaunt Venturers and hedge-king
    Of English morrice-dancery for ever!
    His nine-days' wonder, through the countryside
    Was hawked by every ballad-monger. Kemp
    Raged at their shake-rag Muses. None but I
    Guessed ever for what reason, since he chose
    His anticks for himself and, in his games,
    Was more than most May-fools fantastical.
    I watched his thin face, as he rocked and crooned,
    Shaking the squirrels' tails around his ears;
    And, out of all the players I had seen,
    His face was quickest through its clay to flash
    The passing mood. Though not a muscle stirred,
    The very skin of it seemed to flicker and gleam
    With little summer lightnings of the soul
    At every fleeting fancy. For a man
    So quick to bleed at a pin-prick or to leap
    Laughing through hell to save a butterfly,
    This world was difficult; and perchance he found
    In his fantastic games that open road
    Which even Will Shakespeare only found at last
    In motley and with some wild straws in his hair.
    But "Drawer! drawer!" bellowed Friar Ben,
    "Make ready a righteous breakfast while I preach;--
    Tankards of nut-brown ale, and cold roast beef,
    Cracknels, old cheese, flaunes, tarts and clotted cream.
    Hath any a wish not circumscribed by these?"

    "A white-pot custard, for my white-pot queen,"
    Cried Kemp, waving his bauble, "mark this, boy,
    A white-pot custard for my queen of May,--
    She is not here, but that concerns not thee!--
    A white-pot Mermaid custard, with a crust,
    Lashings of cream, eggs, apple-pulse and spice,
    A little sugar and manchet bread. Away!
    Be swift!"
                    And as I bustled to and fro,
    The Friar raised his big brown fists again
    And preached in mockery of the Puritans
    Who thought to strip the moonshine wings from Mab,
    Tear down the May-poles, rout our English games,
    And drive all beauty back into the sea.

    Then laughter and chatter and clashing tankards drowned
    All but their May-day jollity a-while.
    But, as their breakfast ended, and I sank
    Gasping upon a bench, there came still more
    Poets and players crowding into the room;
    And one--I only knew him as Sir John--
    Waved a great ballad at Will Kemp and laughed,
    "Atonement, Will, atonement!"
                            "What," groaned Kemp,
    "Another penny poet? How many lies
    Does _this_ rogue tell? Sir, I have suffered much
    From these Melpomenes and strawberry quills,
    And think them better at their bloody lines
    On _The Blue Lady_. Sir, they set to work
    At seven o'clock in the morning, the same hour
    That I, myself, that's _Cavaliero_ Kemp,
    With heels of feather and heart of cork, began
    Frolickly footing, from the great Lord Mayor
    Of London, tow'rds the worshipful Master Mayor
    Of Norwich."
                    "Nay, Kemp, this is a May-day tune,
    A morrice of country rhymes, made by a poet
    Who thought it shame so worthy an act as thine
    Should wither in oblivion if the Muse
    With her Castalian showers could keep it green.
    And while the fool nid-nodded all in time,
    Sir John, in swinging measure, trolled this tale:--


    I

    With Georgie Sprat, my overseer, and Thomas Slye, my tabourer,
      And William Bee, my courier, when dawn emblazed the skies,
    I met a tall young butcher as I danced by little Sudbury,
      Head-master o' morrice-dancers all, high headborough of hyes.

    By Sudbury, by Sudbury, by little red-roofed Sudbury,
      He wished to dance a mile with me! I made a courtly bow:
    I fitted him with morrice-bells, with treble, bass and tenor bells,
      And "_Tickle your tabor, Tom_," I cried, "_we're going to market now_."

    And rollicking down the lanes we dashed, and frolicking up the hills
        we clashed,
      And like a sail behind me flapped his great white frock a-while,
    Till, with a gasp, he sank and swore that he could dance with me no more;
      And--over the hedge a milk-maid laughed, _Not dance with him a mile_?

    "You lout!" she laughed, "I'll leave my pail, and dance with him for
        cakes and ale!
      I'll dance a mile for love," she laughed, "and win my wager, too.
    Your feet are shod and mine are bare; but when could leather dance on air?
      A milk-maid's feet can fall as fair and light as falling dew."

    I fitted her with morrice-bells, with treble, bass and tenor bells:
      The fore-bells, as I linked them at her throat, how soft they sang!
    Green linnets in a golden nest, they chirped and trembled on her breast,
      And, faint as elfin blue-bells, at her nut-brown ankles rang.

    I fitted her with morrice-bells that sweetened into woodbine bells,
      And trembled as I hung them there and crowned her sunny brow:
    "Strike up," she laughed, "my summer king!" And all her bells began to ring,
      And "_Tickle your tabor, Tom_," I cried, "_we're going to Sherwood now_!"

    When cocks were crowing, and light was growing, and horns were blowing,
        and milk-pails flowing,
      We swam thro' waves of emerald gloom along a chestnut aisle,
    Then, up a shining hawthorn-lane, we sailed into the sun again,
      Will Kemp and his companion, his companion of a mile.

    "Truer than most," snarled Kemp, "but mostly lies!
    And why does he forget the miry lanes
    By Brainford with thick woods on either side,
    And the deep holes, where I could find no ease
    But skipped up to my waist?" A crackling laugh
    Broke from his lips which, if he had not worn
    The cap and bells, would scarce have roused the mirth
    Of good Sir John, who roundly echoed it,
    Then waved his hand and said, "Nay, but he treats
    Your morrice in the spirit of Lucian, Will,
    Who thought that dancing was no mushroom growth,
    But sprung from the beginning of the world
    When Love persuaded earth, air, water, fire,
    And all the jarring elements to move
    In measure. Right to the heart of it, my lad,
    The song goes, though the skin mislike you so."
    "Nay, an there's more of it, I'll sing it, too!
    'Tis a fine tale, Sir John, I have it by heart,
    Although 'tis lies throughout." Up leapt Will Kemp,
    And crouched and swayed, and swung his bauble round,
    Making the measure as they trolled the tale,
    Chanting alternately, each answering each.


    II

    _The Fool_

    The tabor fainted far behind us, but her feet that day
      They beat a rosier morrice o'er the fairy-circled green.

    _Sir John_

    And o'er a field of buttercups, a field of lambs and buttercups,
      We danced along a cloth of gold, a summer king and queen!

    _The Fool_

    And straying we went, and swaying we went, with lambkins round us
        playing we went;
      Her face uplift to drink the sun, and not for me her smile,
    We danced, a king and queen of May, upon a fleeting holy-day,
      But O, she'd won her wager, my companion of a mile!

    _Sir John_

    Her rosy lips they never spoke, though every rosy foot-fall broke
      The dust, the dust to Eden-bloom; and, past the throbbing blue,
    All ordered to her rhythmic feet, the stars were dancing with my sweet,
      And all the world a morrice-dance!

    _The Fool_

                                         She knew not; but I knew!
    Love like Amphion with his lyre, made all the elements conspire
      To build His world of music. All in rhythmic rank and file,
    I saw them in their cosmic dance, catch hands across, retire, advance,
      For me and my companion, my companion of a mile!

    _Sir John_

    The little leaves on every tree, the rivers winding to the sea,
      The swinging tides, the wheeling winds, the rolling heavens above,
    Around the May-pole Igdrasil, they worked the Morrice-master's will,
      Persuaded into measure by the all-creative Love.

    That hour I saw, from depth to height, this wildering universe unite!
      The lambs of God around us and His passion in every flower!

    _The Fool_

    His grandeur in the dust, His dust a blaze of blinding majesty,
      And all His immortality in one poor mortal hour.

    And Death was but a change of key in Life the golden melody,
      And Time became Eternity, and Heaven a fleeting smile;
    For all was each and each was all, and all a wedded unity,
      Her heart in mine, and mine in my companion of a mile.

    _Thwack_! _Thwack_! He whirled his bauble round about,
      "This fellow beats them all," he cried, "the worst
    Those others wrote was that I hopped from York
    To Paris with a mortar on my head.
    This fellow sends me leaping through the clouds
    To buss the moon! The best is yet to come;
    Strike up, Sir John! Ha! ha! You know no more?"
    Kemp leapt upon a table. "Clear the way",
    He cried, and with a great stamp of his foot
    And a wild crackling laugh, drew all to hark,
              "With hey and ho, through thick and thin,
               The hobby-horse is forgotten,
             But I must finish what I begin,
               Tho' all the roads be rotten.

     "By all those twenty thousand chariots, Ben,
    Hear this true tale they shall! Now, let me see,
    Where was Will Kemp? Bussing the moon's pale mouth?
    Ah, yes!" He crouched above the listening throng,--
    "_Good as a play_," I heard one whispering quean,--
    And, waving his bauble, shuffling with his feet
    In a dance that marked the time, he sank his voice
    As if to breathe great secrets, and so sang:--


    III

    At Melford town, at Melford town, at little grey-roofed Melford town,
      A long mile from Sudbury, upon the village green,
    We danced into a merry rout of country-folk that skipt about
      A hobby-horse, a May-pole, and a laughing white-pot queen.

    They thronged about us as we stayed, and there I gave my sunshine maid
      An English crown for cakes and ale--her dancing was so true!
    And "Nay," she said, "I danced my mile for love!" I answered with a smile,
      "'Tis but a silver token, lass, 'thou'st won that wager, too."

    I took my leash of morrice-bells, my treble, bass and tenor bells,
      They pealed like distant marriage-bells! And up came William Bee
    With Georgie Sprat, my overseer, and Thomas Slye, my tabourer,
      "Farewell," she laughed, and vanished with a Suffolk courtesie.
    I leapt away to Rockland, and from Rockland on to Hingham,
      From Hingham on to Norwich, sirs! I hardly heard a-while
    The throngs that followed after, with their shouting and their laughter,
      For a shadow danced beside me, my companion of a mile!

    At Norwich, by St. Giles his gate, I entered, and the Mayor in state,
      With all the rosy knights and squires for twenty miles about,
    With trumpets and with minstrelsy, was waiting there to welcome me;
      And, as I skipt into the street, the City raised a shout.

    They gave me what I did not seek. I fed on roasted swans a week!
      They pledged me in their malmsey, and they lined me warm with ale!
    They sleeked my skin with red-deer pies, and all that runs and
        swims and flies;
      But, through the clashing wine-cups, O, I heard her clanking pail.

    And, rising from his crimson chair, the worshipful and portly Mayor
      Bequeathed me forty shillings every year that I should live,
    With five good angels in my hand that I might drink while I could stand!
      They gave me golden angels! What I lacked they could not give.

    They made Will Kemp, thenceforward, sirs, Freeman of Marchaunt Venturers!
      They hoped that I would dance again from Norwich up to York;
    Then they asked me, all together, had I met with right May weather,
      And they praised my heels of feather, and my heart, my heart of cork.

       *   *   *   *

    As I came home by Sudbury, by little red-roofed Sudbury,
      I waited for my bare-foot maid, among her satin kine!
    I heard a peal of wedding-bells, of treble, bass and tenor bells:
      "Ring well," I cried, "this bridal morn! You soon shall ring for mine!"

    I found her foot-prints in the grass, just where she stood and saw me pass.
      I stood within her own sweet field and waited for my may.
    I laughed. The dance has turned about! I stand within: she'll pass without,
      And--_down the road the wedding came, the road I danced that day_!

    _I saw the wedding-folk go by, with laughter and with minstrelsy,
      I gazed across her own sweet hedge, I caught her happy smile,
    I saw the tall young butcher pass to little red-roofed Sudbury,
      His bride upon his arm, my lost companion of a mile._

        Down from his table leapt the motley Fool.
        His bladder bounced from head to ducking head,
        His crackling laugh rang high,--"Sir John, I danced
        In February, and the song says May!
        A fig for all your poets, liars all!
        Away to Fenchurch Street, lasses and lads,
        They hold high revel there this May-day morn.
        Away!" The mad-cap throng echoed the cry.
        He drove them with his bauble through the door;
        Then, as the last gay kerchief fluttered out
        He gave one little sharp sad lingering cry
        As of a lute-string breaking. He turned back

    And threw himself along a low dark bench;
    His jingling cap was crumpled in his fist,
    And, as he lay there, all along Cheapside
    The happy voices of his comrades rang:--

          Out of the woods we'll dance and sing
          Under the morning-star of Spring,
          Into the town with our fresh boughs
          And knock at every sleeping house,
                Not sighing,
                Or crying,
          Though Love knows no denying!
          Then, round your summer queen and king,
          Come, young lovers, dance and sing,
                Dance and sing!

    His motley shoulders heaved. I touched his arm,
    "What ails you, sir?" He raised his thin white face,
    Wet with the May-dew still. A few stray petals
    Clung in his tangled hair. He leapt to his feet,
    "'Twas February, but I danced, boy, danced
    In May! Can you do this?" Forward he bent
    Over his feet, and shuffled it, heel and toe,
    Out of the Mermaid, singing his old song--

                  A-maying,
                  A-playing,
          For Love knows no gain-saying!
          Wisdom trips not? Even so,--
          Come, young lovers, trip and go,
                  Trip and go.

    Five minutes later, over the roaring Strand,
    "_Chorus!_" I heard him crow, and half the town
    Reeled into music under his crimson comb.


VI

BIG BEN

    Gods, what a hubbub shook our cobwebs out
    The day that Chapman, Marston and our Ben
    Waited in Newgate for the hangman's hands.

    Chapman and Marston had been flung there first
    For some imagined insult to the Scots
    In _Eastward Ho_, the play they wrote with Ben.
    But Ben was famous now, and our brave law
    Would fain have winked and passed the big man by.
    The lesser men had straightway been condemned
    To have their ears cut off, their noses slit.
    With other tortures.

                          Ben had risen at that!
    He gripped his cudgel, called for a quart of ale,
    Then like Helvellyn with his rocky face
    And mountain-belly, he surged along Cheapside,
    Snorting with wrath, and rolled into the gaol,
    To share the punishment.

                              "There is my mark!
    'Tis not the first time you have branded me,"
    Said our big Ben, and thrust his broad left thumb
    Branded with T for Tyburn, into the face
    Of every protest. "That's the mark you gave me
    Because I killed my man in Spitalfields,
    A duel honest as any your courtiers fight.
    But I was no Fitzdotterel, bore no gules
    And azure, robbed no silk-worms for my hose,
    I was Ben Jonson, out of Annandale,
    Bricklayer in common to the good Lord God.
    You branded me. I am Ben Jonson still.
    You cannot rub it out."

                              The Mermaid Inn
    Buzzed like a hornet's nest, upon the day
    Fixed for their mutilation. And the stings
    Were ready, too; for rapiers flashed and clashed
    Among the tankards. Dekker was there, and Nash,
    Brome (Jonson's body-servant, whom he taught
    His art of verse and, more than that, to love him,)
    And half a dozen more. They planned to meet
    The prisoners going to Tyburn, and attempt
    A desperate rescue.

                        All at once we heard
    A great gay song come marching down the street,
    A single voice, and twenty marching men,
    Then the full chorus, twenty voices strong:--

    The prentice whistles at break of day
      All under fair roofs and towers,
    When the old Cheape openeth every way
      Her little sweet inns like flowers;
    And he sings like a lark, both early and late,
      To think, if his house take fire,
    At the good _Green Dragon_ in Bishopsgate
      He may drink to his heart's desire.

    _Chorus:_ Or sit at his ease in the old _Cross Keys_
      And drink to his heart's desire.

    But I, as I walk by _Red Rose Lane_,
      Tho' it warmeth my heart to see
    _The Swan_, _The Golden Hynde_, and _The Crane_,
      With the door set wide for me;
    Tho' Signs like daffodils paint the strand
      When the thirsty bees begin,
    Of all the good taverns in Engeland
      My choice is--_The Mermaid Inn_.

    _Chorus:_ There is much to be said for _The Saracen's Head_,
      But my choice is _The Mermaid Inn_.

    Into the tavern they rushed, these roaring boys.
    "Now broach your ripest and your best," they cried.
      "All's well! They are all released! They are on the way!
    Old Camden and young Selden worked the trick.
    Where is Dame Dimpling? Where's our jolly hostess?
    Tell her the Mermaid Tavern will have guests:
    We are sent to warn her. She must raid Cook's Row,
    And make their ovens roar. Nobody dines
    This day with old Duke Humphrey. Red-deer pies,
    Castles of almond crust, a shield of brawn
    Big as the nether millstone, barrels of wine,
    Three roasted peacocks! Ben is on the way!"
    Then all the rafters rang with song again:--

          There was a Prince--long since, long since!--
            To East Cheape did resort,
          For that he loved _The Blue Boar's Head_
            Far better than Crown or Court;

          But old King Harry in Westminster
            Hung up, for all to see,
          Three bells of power in St. Stephen's Tower,
            Yea, bells of a thousand and three,

    _Chorus:_ Three bells of power in a timber tower,
      Thirty thousand and three,

          For Harry the Fourth was a godly king
            And loved great godly bells!
          He bade them ring and he bade them swing
            Till a man might hear nought else.
          In every tavern it soured the sack
            With discord and with din;
          But they drowned it all in a madrigal
            Like this, at _The Mermaid Inn_.

    _Chorus:_ They drowned it all in a madrigal
            Like this, at _The Mermaid Inn._

      "But how did Selden work it?"--"Nobody knows.
    They will be here anon. Better ask Will.
    He's the magician!"--"Ah, here comes Dame Dimpling!"
    And, into the rollicking chaos our good Dame
    --A Dame of only two and thirty springs--
    All lavender and roses and white kerchief,
    Bustled, to lay the tables.

                                Fletcher flung
    His arm around her waist and kissed her cheek.
    But all she said was, "_One--two--three--four--five--
    Six at a pinch, in yonder window-seat._"
    "A health to our Dame Dimpling," Beaumont cried,
    And Dekker, leaping on the old black settle,
    Led all their tumult into a song again:--

    What is the Mermaid's merriest toast?
      Our hostess--good Dame Dimpling!
    Who is it rules the Mermaid roast?
    Who is it bangs the Mermaid host,
    Tho' her hands be soft as her heart almost?
                Dame Dimpling!

    She stands at the board in her fresh blue gown
      With the sleeves tucked up--Dame Dimpling!
    She rolls the white dough up and down
    And her pies are crisp, and her eyes are brown.
    So--she is the Queen of all this town,--
                Dame Dimpling!

    Her sheets are white as black-thorn bloom,
      White as her neck, Dame Dimpling!
    Her lavender sprigs in the London gloom
    Make every little bridal-room
    A country nook of fresh perfume,--
                Dame Dimpling!

    She wears white lace on her dark brown hair:
      And a rose on her breast, Dame Dimpling!
    And who can show you a foot as fair
    Or an ankle as neat when she climbs the stair,
    Taper in hand, and head in the air,
    And a rose in her cheek?--O, past compare,
                Dame Dimpling!

    "But don't forget those oyster-pies," cried Lyly.
    "Nor the roast beef," roared Dekker. "Prove yourself
    The Muse of meat and drink."

                                  There was a shout
    In Bread Street, and our windows all swung wide,
    Six heads at each.

                        Nat Field bestrode our sign
    And kissed the painted Mermaid on her lips,
    Then waved his tankard.

                            "Here they come," he cried.
    "Camden and Selden, Chapman and Marston, too,
    And half Will's company with our big Ben
    Riding upon their shoulders."

                                  "Look!" cried Dekker,
    "But where is Atlas now? O, let them have it!
    A thumping chorus, lads! Let the roof crack!"
    And all the Mermaid clashed and banged again
    In thunderous measure to the marching tune
    That rolled down Bread Street, forty voices strong:--

          At _Ypres Inn_, by _Wring-wren Lane_,
            Old John of Gaunt would dine:
          He scarce had opened an oyster or twain,
            Or drunk one flagon of wine,
          When, all along the Vintry Ward,
            He heard the trumpets blow,
          And a voice that roared--"If thou love thy lord,
            Tell John of Gaunt to go!"

    _Chorus:_ A great voice roared--"If thou love thy lord,
            Tell John of Gaunt to go!"

          Then into the room rushed Haviland
            That fair fat Flemish host,
          "They are marching hither with sword and brand,
            Ten thousand men--almost!
          It is these oysters or thy sweet life,
            Thy blood or the best of the bin!"--
          "Proud Pump, avaunt!" quoth John of Gaunt,
            "I will dine at _The Mermaid Inn!_"

    _Chorus:_ "Proud Pump, avaunt!" quoth John of Gaunt,
            "There is wine at _The Mermaid Inn!_"

    And in came Ben like a great galleon poised
    High on the white crest of a shouting wave,
    And then the feast began. The fragrant steam
    As from the kitchens of Olympus drew
    A throng of ragged urchins to our doors.
    Ben ordered them a castellated pie
    That rolled a cloud around them where they sat
    Munching upon the cobblestones. Our casements
    Dripped with the golden dews of Helicon;
    And, under the warm feast our cellarage
    Gurgled and foamed in the delicious cool
    With crimson freshets--
                            "Tell us," cried Nat Field,
    When pipes began to puff. "How did you work it?"
    Camden chuckled and tugged his long white beard.
    "Out of the mouth of babes," he said and shook
    His head at Selden! "O, young man, young man,
    There's a career before you! Selden did it.
    Take my advice, my children. Make young Selden
    Solicitor-general to the Mermaid Inn.
    That rosy silken smile of his conceals
    A scholar! Yes, that suckling lawyer there
    Puts my grey beard to shame. His courteous airs
    And silken manners hide the nimblest wit
    That ever trimmed a sail to catch the wind
    Of courtly favour. Mark my words now, Ben,
    That youth will sail right up against the wind
    By skilful tacking. But you run it fine,
    Selden, you run it fine. Take my advice
    And don't be too ironical, my boy,
    Or even the King will see it."
                                    He chuckled again.
    "But tell them of your tractate!"
                                      "Here it is,"
    Quoth Selden, twisting a lighted paper spill,
    Then, with his round cherubic face aglow
    Lit his long silver pipe,
                              "Why, first," he said,
    "Camden being Clarencieux King-at-arms,
    He read the King this little tract I wrote
    Against tobacco." And the Mermaid roared
    With laughter. "Well, you went the way to hang
    All three of them," cried Lyly, "and, as for Ben,
    His Trinidado goes to bed with him."
    "Green gosling, quack no more," Selden replied,
    Smiling that rosy silken smile anew.
    "The King's a _critic_! When have critics known
    The poet from his creatures, God from me?
    How many cite Polonius to their sons
    And call it Shakespeare? Well, I took my text
    From sundry creatures of our great big Ben,
    And called it 'Jonson.'
                            Camden read it out
    Without the flicker of an eye. His beard
    Saved us, I think. The King admired his text.
    '_There is a man_,' he read, '_lies at death's door
    Thro' taking of tobacco. Yesterday
    He voided a bushel of soot_.'
                                  'God bless my soul,
    A bushel of soot! Think of it!' said the King.
    'The man who wrote those great and splendid words,'
    Camden replied,--I had prepared his case
    Carefully--'lies in Newgate prison, sire.
    His nose and ears await the hangman's knife.'

    'Ah,' said the shrewd King, goggling his great eyes
    Cannily. 'Did he not defame the Scots?'
    'That's true,' said Camden, like a man that hears
    Truth for the first time. 'O ay, he defamed 'em,'
    The King said, very wisely, once again.
    'Ah, but,' says Camden, like a man that strives
    With more than mortal wit, 'only such Scots
    As flout your majesty, and take tobacco.
    He is a Scot, himself, and hath the gift
    Of preaching.' Then we gave him Jonson's lines
    Against Virginia. '_Neither do thou lust
    After that tawny weed; for who can tell,
    Before the gathering and the making up,
    What alligarta may have spawned thereon_,'
    Or words to that effect.
                              'Magneeficent!'
    Spluttered the King--'who knows? Who knows, indeed?
    That's a grand touch, that Alligarta, Camden!'
    'The Scot who wrote those great and splendid words,'
    Said Camden, 'languishes in Newgate, sire.
    His ears and nose--'
                          And there, as we arranged
    With Inigo Jones, the ladies of the court
    Assailed the King in tears. Their masque and ball
    Would all be ruined. All their Grecian robes,
    Procured at vast expense, were wasted now.
    The masque was not half-written. Master Jones
    Had lost his poets. They were all in gaol.
    Their noses and their ears ...
                                    'God bless my soul,'
    Spluttered the King, goggling his eyes again,
    'What d'you make of it, Camden?'--
                                        'I should say
    A Puritan plot, sire; for these justices--
    Who love tobacco--use their law, it seems,
    To flout your Majesty at every turn.
    If this continue, sire, there'll not be left
    A loyal ear or nose in all your realm.'
    At that, our noble monarch well-nigh swooned.
    He hunched his body, padded as it was
    Against the assassin's knife, six inches deep
    With great green quilts, wagged his enormous head,
    Then, in a dozen words, he wooed destruction:
    'It is presumption and a high contempt
    In subjects to dispute what kings can do,'
    He whimpered. 'Even as it is blasphemy
    To thwart the will of God.'
                                He waved his hand,
    And rose. 'These men must be released, at once!'
    Then, as I think, to seek a safer place,
    He waddled from the room, his rickety legs
    Doubling beneath that great green feather-bed
    He calls his 'person.'--I shall dream to-night
    Of spiders, Camden.--But in half an hour,
    Inigo Jones was armed with Right Divine
    To save such ears and noses as the ball
    Required for its perfection. Think of that!
    And let this earthly ball remember, too,
    That Chapman, Marston, and our great big Ben
    Owe their poor adjuncts to--ten Grecian robes
    And 'Jonson' on tobacco! England loves
    Her poets, O, supremely, when they're dead."
    "But Ben has narrowly escaped her love,"
    Said Chapman gravely.
                          "What do you mean?" said Lodge.
    And, as he spoke, there was a sudden hush.
    A tall gaunt woman with great burning eyes,
    And white hair blown back softly from a face
    Ethereally fierce, as might have looked
    Cassandra in old age, stood at the door.
    "Where is my Ben?" she said.
                                  "Mother!" cried Ben.
    He rose and caught her in his mighty arms.
    Her labour-reddened, long-boned hands entwined
    Behind his neck.
                      "She brought this to the gaol,"
    Said Chapman quietly, tossing a phial across
    To Camden. "And he meant to take it, too,
    Before the hangman touched him. Half an hour
    And you'd have been too late to save big Ben.
    He has lived too much in ancient Rome to love
    A slit nose and the pillory. He'd have wrapped
    His purple round him like an emperor.
    I think she had another for herself."
    "There's Roman blood in both of them," said Dekker,
    "Don't look. She is weeping now," And, while Ben held
    That gaunt old body sobbing against his heart,
    Dekker, to make her think they paid no heed,
    Began to sing; and very softly now.
    Full forty voices echoed the refrain:--

          _The Cardinal's Hat_ is a very good inn,
            And so is _The Puritan's Head_;
          But I know a sign of a Wine, a Wine
            That is better when all is said.
          It is whiter than Venus, redder than Mars,
            It was old when the world begun;
          For all good inns are moons or stars
            But _The Mermaid_ is their Sun.

    _Chorus:_ They are all alight like moons in the night,
            But _The Mermaid_ is their Sun.

          Therefore, when priest or parson cries
            That inns like flowers increase,
          I say that mine inn is a church likewise,
            And I say to them "Be at peace!"
          An host may gather in dark St. Paul's
            To salve their souls from sin;
          But the Light may be where "two or three"
            Drink Wine in _The Mermaid Inn_.

    _Chorus:_ The Light may be where "two or three"
            Drink Wine in _The Mermaid Inn_.


VII

THE BURIAL OF A QUEEN

    'Twas on an All Souls' Eve that our good Inn
    --Whereof, for ten years now, myself was host--
    Heard and took part in its most eerie tale.
      It was a bitter night, and master Ben,
    --His hair now flecked with grey, though youth still fired
    His deep and ageless eyes,--in the old oak-chair,
    Over the roaring hearth, puffed at his pipe;
    A little sad, as often I found him now
    Remembering vanished faces. Yet the years
    Brought others round him. Wreaths of Heliochrise
    Gleamed still in that great tribe of Benjamin,
    Burned still across the malmsey and muscadel.
    Chapman and Browne, Herrick,--a name like thyme
    Crushed into sweetness by a bare-foot maid
    Milking, at dewy dawn, in Elfin-land,--
    These three came late, and sat in a little room
    Aside, supping together, on one great pie,
    Whereof both crust and coffin were prepared
    By master Herrick's receipt, and all washed down
    With mighty cups of sack. This left with Ben,
    John Ford, wrapped in his cloak, brooding aloof,
    Drayton and Lodge and Drummond of Hawthornden.
      Suddenly, in the porch, I heard a sound
    Of iron that grated on the flags. A spade
    And pick came edging through the door.

                                            "O, room!
    Room for the master-craftsman," muttered Ford,
    And grey old sexton Scarlet hobbled in.
      He shuffled off the snow that clogged his boots,
    --On my clean rushes!--brushed it from his cloak
    Of Northern Russet, wiped his rheumatic knees,
    Blew out his lanthorn, hung it on a nail,
    Leaned his rude pick and spade against the wall,
    Flung back his rough frieze hood, flapped his gaunt arms,
    And called for ale.

                        "Come to the fire," said Lodge.
    "Room for the wisest counsellor of kings,
    The kindly sage that puts us all to bed,
    And tucks us up beneath the grass-green quilt."
      "Plenty of work, eh Timothy?" said Ben.
    "Work? Where's my liquor? O, ay, there's work to spare,"
    Old Scarlet croaked, then quaffed his creaming stoup,
    While Ben said softly--"Pity you could not spare,
    You and your Scythe-man, some of the golden lads
    That I have seen here in the Mermaid Inn!"
    Then, with a quiet smile he shook his head
    And turned to master Drummond of Hawthornden.
    "Well, songs are good; but flesh and blood are better.
    The grey old tomb of Horace glows for me
    Across the centuries, with one little fire
    Lit by a girl's light hand." Then, under breath,
    Yet with some passion, he murmured this brief rhyme:--

    I

    _Dulce ridentem_, laughing through the ages,
      _Dulce loquentem_, O, fairer far to me,
    Rarer than the wisdom of all his golden pages
      Floats the happy laughter of his vanished Lalage.

    II

    _Dulce loquentem_,--we hear it and we know it.
      _Dulce ridentem_,--so musical and low.
    "Mightier than marble is my song!" Ah, did the poet
      Know why little Lalage was mightier even so?

    III

    _Dulce ridentem_,--through all the years that sever,
      Clear as o'er yon hawthorn hedge we heard her passing by,--
    _Lalagen amabo_,--a song may live for ever
      _Dulce loquentem_,--but Lalage must die.

    "I'd like to learn that rhyme," the sexton said.
    "I've a fine memory too. You start me now,
    I'd keep it up all night with ancient ballads."
      And then--a strange thing happened. I saw John Ford
    "With folded arms and melancholy hat"
    (As in our Mermaid jest he still would sit)
    Watching old Scarlet like a man in trance.
    The sexton gulped his ale and smacked his lips,
    Then croaked again--"O, ay, there's work to spare,
    We fills 'em faster than the spades can dig,"
    And, all at once, the lights burned low and blue.
    Ford leaned right forward, with his grim black eyes
    Widening.

              "Why, that's a marvellous ring!" he said,
    And pointed to the sexton's gnarled old hand
    Spread on the black oak-table like the claw
    Of some great bird of prey. "A ruby worth
    The ransom of a queen!" The fire leapt up!
    The sexton stared at him;
    Then stretched his hand out, with its blue-black nails,
    Full in the light, a grim earth-coloured hand,
    But bare as it was born.

                              "There was a ring!
    I could have sworn it! Red as blood!" cried Ford.
    And Ben and Lodge and Drummond of Hawthornden
    All stared at him. For such a silent soul
    Was master Ford that, when he suddenly spake,
    It struck the rest as dumb as if the Sphinx
    Had opened its cold stone lips. He would sit mute
    Brooding, aloof, for hours, his cloak around him,
    A staff between his knees, as if prepared
    For a long journey, a lonely pilgrimage
    To some dark tomb; a strange and sorrowful soul,
    Yet not--as many thought him--harsh or hard,
    But of a most kind patience. Though he wrote
    In blood, they say, the blood came from his heart;
    And all the sufferings of this world he took
    To his own soul, and bade them pasture there:
    Till out of his compassion, he became
    A monument of bitterness. He rebelled;
    And so fell short of that celestial height
    Whereto the greatest only climb, who stand
    By Shakespeare, and accept the Eternal Law.
    These find, in law, firm footing for the soul,
    The strength that binds the stars, and reins the sea,
    The base of being, the pillars of the world,
    The pledge of honour, the pure cord of love,
    The form of truth, the golden floors of heaven.
    These men discern a height beyond all heights,
    A depth below all depths, and never an end
    Without a pang beyond it, and a hope;
    Without a heaven beyond it, and a hell.
    For these, despair is like a bubble pricked,
    An old romance to make young lovers weep.
    For these, the law becomes a fiery road,
    A Jacob's ladder through that vast abyss
    Lacking no rung from realm to loftier realm,
    Nor wanting one degree from dust to wings.
    These, at the last, radiant with victory,
    Lay their strong hands upon the wingèd steeds
    And fiery chariots, and exult to hold,
    Themselves, the throbbing reins, whereby they steer
    The stormy splendours.
                           He, being less, rebelled,
    Cried out for unreined steeds, and unruled stars,
    An unprohibited ocean and a truth
    Untrue; and the equal thunder of the law
    Hurled him to night and chaos, who was born
    To shine upon the forehead of the day.
    And yet--the voice of darkness and despair
    May speak for heaven where heaven would not be heard,
    May fight for heaven where heaven would not prevail,
    And the consummate splendour of that strife,
    Swallowing up all discords, all defeat,
    In one huge victory, harmonising all,
    Make Lucifer, at last, at one with God.

      There,--on that All Souls' Eve, you might have thought
    A dead man spoke, to see how Drayton stared,
    And Drummond started.
                          "You saw no ruby ring,"
    The old sexton muttered sullenly. "If you did,
    The worse for me, by all accounts. The lights
    Burned low. You caught the firelight on my fist.
    What was it like, this ring?"
                                  "A band of gold,
    And a great ruby, heart-shaped, fit to burn
    Between the breasts of Laïs. Am I awake
    Or dreaming?"
                  "Well,--that makes the second time!
    There's many have said they saw it, out of jest,
    To scare me. For the astrologer did say
    The third time I should die. Now, did you see it?
    Most likely someone's told you that old tale!
    You hadn't heard it, now?"
                               Ford shook his head.
    "What tale?" said Ben.
                           "O, you could make a book
    About my life. I've talked with quick and dead,
    And neither ghost nor flesh can fright me now!
    I wish it was a ring, so's I could catch him,
    And sell him; but I've never seen him yet.
    A white witch told me, if I did, I'd go
    Clink, just like that, to heaven or t'other place,
    Whirled in a fiery chariot with ten steeds
    The way Elijah went. For I have seen
    So many mighty things that I must die
    Mightily.
              Well,--I came, sirs, to my craft
    The day mine uncle Robert dug the grave
    For good Queen Katharine, she whose heart was broke
    By old King Harry, a very great while ago.
    Maybe you've heard about my uncle, sirs?
    He was far-famous for his grave-digging.
    In depth, in speed, in neatness, he'd no match!
    They've put a fine slab to his memory
    In Peterborough Cathedral--_Robert Scarlet,
    Sexton for half a century_, it says,
    _In Peterborough Cathedral, where he built
    The last sad habitation for two queens,
    And many hundreds of the common sort.
    And now himself, who for so many built
    Eternal habitations, others have buried._
    _Obiit anno ætatis, ninety-eight,
    July the second, fifteen ninety-four._
      We should do well, sir, with a slab like that,
    Shouldn't we?" And the sexton leered at Lodge.
    "Not many boasts a finer slab than that.
    There's many a king done worse. Ah, well, you see,
    He'd a fine record. Living to ninety-eight,
    He buried generations of the poor,
    A countless host, and thought no more of it
    Than digging potatoes. He'd a lofty mind
    That found no satisfaction in small deeds.
    But from his burying of two queens he drew
    A lively pleasure. Could he have buried a third,
    It would indeed have crowned his old white hairs.
    But he was famous, and he thought, perchance,
    A third were mere vain-glory. So he died.
    I helped him with the second."
                                   The old man leered
    To see the shaft go home.
                              Ben filled the stoup
    With ale. "So that," quoth he, "began the tale
    About this ruby ring?" "But who," said Lodge,
    "Who was the second queen?"
                                "A famous queen,
    And a great lover! When you hear her name,
    Your hearts will leap. Her beauty passed the bounds
    Of modesty, men say, yet--she died young!
    We buried her at midnight. There were few
    That knew it; for the high State Funeral
    Was held upon the morrow, Lammas morn.
    Anon you shall hear why. A strange thing that,--
    To see the mourners weeping round a hearse
    That held a dummy coffin. Stranger still
    To see us lowering the true coffin down
    By torchlight, with some few of her true friends,
    In Peterborough Cathedral, all alone."
      "Old as the world," said Ford. "It is the way
    Of princes. Their true tears and smiles are seen
    At dead of night, like ghosts raised from the grave!
    And all the luxury of their brief, bright noon,
    Cloaks but a dummy throne, a mask of life;
    And, at the last, drapes a false catafalque,
    Holding a vacant urn, a mask of death.
    But tell, tell on!"
                        The sexton took a draught
    Of ale and smacked his lips.
                                 "Mine uncle lived
    A mile or more from Peterborough, then.
    And, past his cottage, in the dead of night,
    Her royal coach came creeping through the lanes,
    With scutcheons round it and no crowd to see,
    And heralds carrying torches in their hands,
    And none to admire, but him and me, and one,
    A pedlar-poet, who lodged with us that week
    And paid his lodging with a bunch of rhymes.
    By these, he said, my uncle Robert's fame
    Should live, as in a picture, till the crack
    Of doom. My uncle thought that he should pay
    Four-pence beside; but, when the man declared
    The thought unworthy of these august events,
    My uncle was abashed.
                          And, truth to tell,
    The rhymes were mellow, though here and there he swerved
    From truth to make them so. Nor would he change
    'June' to 'July' for all that we could say.
    'I never said the month was June,' he cried,
    'And if I did, Shakespeare hath jumped an age!
    Gods, will you hedge me round with thirty nights?
    "June" rhymes with "moon"!' With that, he flung them down
    And strode away like Lucifer, and was gone,
    Before old Scarlet could approach again
    The matter of that four-pence.
                                   Yet his rhymes
    Have caught the very colours of that night!
    I can see through them,
    Ay, just as through our cottage window-panes,
    Can see the great black coach,
    Carrying the dead queen past our garden-gate.
    The roses bobbing and fluttering to and fro,
    Hide, and yet show the more by hiding, half.
    And, like smoked glass through which you see the sun,
    The song shows truest when it blurs the truth.
    This is the way it goes."
                              He rose to his feet,
    Picked up his spade, and struck an attitude,
    Leaning upon it. "I've got to feel my spade,
    Or I'll forget it. This is the way I speak it.
    Always." And, with a schoolboy's rigid face,
    And eyes fixed on the rafters, he began,
    Sing-song, the pedlar-poet's bunch of rhymes:--

    As I went by the cattle-shed
      The grey dew dimmed the grass,
    And, under a twisted apple-tree,
    Old Robin Scarlet stood by me.
    "Keep watch! Keep watch to-night," he said,
      "There's things 'ull come to pass.

    "Keep watch until the moon has cleared
      The thatch of yonder rick;
    Then I'll come out of my cottage-door
    To wait for the coach of a queen once more;
    And--you'll say nothing of what you've heard,
      But rise and follow me quick."

    "And what 'ull I see if I keep your trust,
      And wait and watch so late?"
    "Pride," he said, "and Pomp," he said,
    "Beauty to haunt you till you're dead,
    And Glorious Dust that goes to dust,
      Passing the white farm-gate.

    "You are young and all for adventure, lad,
      And the great tales to be told:
    This night, before the clock strike one,
    Your lordliest hour will all be done;
    But you'll remember it and be glad,
      In the days when you are old!"

    All in the middle of the night,
      My face was at the pane;
    When, creeping out of his cottage-door,
    To wait for the coach of a queen once more,
    Old Scarlet, in the moon-light,
      Beckoned to me again.

    He stood beneath a lilac-spray,
      Like Father Time for dole,
    In Reading Tawny cloak and hood,
    With mattock and with spade he stood,
    And, far away to southward,
      A bell began to toll.

    He stood beneath a lilac-spray,
      And never a word he said;
    But, as I stole out of the house,
    He pointed over the orchard boughs,
    Where, not with dawn or sunset,
      The Northern sky grew red.

    I followed him, and half in fear,
      To the old farm-gate again;
    And, round the curve of the long white road,
    I saw that the dew-dashed hedges glowed
    Red with the grandeur drawing near,
      And the torches of her train.

    They carried her down with singing,
      With singing sweet and low,
    Slowly round the curve they came,
    Twenty torches dropping flame,
    The heralds that were bringing her
      The way we all must go.

    'Twas master William Dethick,
      The Garter King of Arms,
    Before her royal coach did ride,
    With none to see his Coat of Pride,
    For peace was on the countryside,
      And sleep upon the farms;

    Peace upon the red farm,
      Peace upon the grey,
    Peace on the heavy orchard trees,
    And little white-walled cottages,
    Peace upon the wayside,
      And sleep upon the way.

    So master William Dethick,
      With forty horse and men,
    Like any common man and mean
    Rode on before the Queen, the Queen,
    And--only a wandering pedlar
      Could tell the tale again.

    How, like a cloud of darkness,
      Between the torches moved
    Four black steeds and a velvet pall
    Crowned with the Crown Imperiall
    And--on her shield--the lilies,
      The lilies that she loved.

    Ah, stained and ever stainless
      Ah, white as her own hand,
    White as the wonder of that brow,
    Crowned with colder lilies now,
    White on the velvet darkness,
      The lilies of her land!

    The witch from over the water,
      The fay from over the foam,
    The bride that rode thro' Edinbro' town
    With satin shoes and a silken gown,
    A queen, and a great king's daughter,--
      Thus they carried her home,

    With torches and with scutcheons,
      Unhonoured and unseen,
    With the lilies of France in the wind a-stir,
    And the Lion of Scotland over her,
    Darkly, in the dead of night,
      They carried the Queen, the Queen.

    The sexton paused and took a draught of ale.
    "'Twas there," he said, "I joined 'em at the gate,
    My uncle and the pedlar. What they sang,
    The little shadowy throng of men that walked
    Behind the scutcheoned coach with bare bent heads
    I know not; but 'twas very soft and low.
    They walked behind the rest, like shadows flung
    Behind the torch-light, from that strange dark hearse.
    And, some said, afterwards, they were the ghosts
    Of lovers that this queen had brought to death.
    A foolish thought it seemed to me, and yet
    Like the night-wind they sang. And there was one
    An olive-coloured man,--the pedlar said
    Was like a certain foreigner that she loved,
    One Chastelard, a wild French poet of hers.
    Also the pedlar thought they sang 'farewell'
    In words like this, and that the words in French
    Were written by the hapless Queen herself,
    When as a girl she left the vines of France
    For Scotland and the halls of Holyrood:--

    I

            Though thy hands have plied their trade
              Eighty years without a rest,
            Robin Scarlet, never thy spade
              Built a house for such a guest!
            Carry her where, in earliest June,
              All the whitest hawthorns blow;
            Carry her under the midnight moon,
              Singing very soft and low.
    Slow between the low green larches, carry the lovely lady sleeping,
      Past the low white moon-lit farms, along the lilac-shadowed way!
    Carry her through the summer darkness, weeping, weeping, weeping, weeping!
      Answering only, to any that ask you, whence ye carry her,--_Fotheringhay!_

    II

            She was gayer than a child!
            --_Let your torches droop for sorrow._--
            Laughter in her eyes ran wild!
            --_Carry her down to Peterboro'._--
            Words were kisses in her mouth!
            --_Let no word of blame be spoken._--
            She was Queen of all the South!
            --_In the North, her heart was broken._--
    They should have left her in her vineyards, left her heart to her
        land's own keeping,
      Left her white breast room to breathe, and left her light foot free
          to dance.
    Out of the cold grey Northern mists, we carry her weeping,
        weeping, weeping,--
                  _O, ma patrie,
                  La plus chérie,
            Adieu, plaisant pays de France!_


    III

            Many a red heart died to beat
            --_Music swelled in Holyrood!_--
            Once, beneath her fair white feet.
            --_Now the floors may rot with blood_--
            She was young and her deep hair--
            --_Wind and rain were all her fate!_--
            Trapped young Love as in a snare,
            --_And the wind's a sword in the Canongate!
                          Edinboro'!
                          Edinboro'!
    Music built the towers of Troy, but thy grey walls are built of sorrow!_
    Wind-swept hills, and sorrowful glens, of thrifty sowing and iron reaping,
      What if her foot were fair as a sunbeam, how should it touch or
          melt your snows?
            What if her hair were a silken mesh?
            Hands of steel can deal hard blows,
            Iron breast-plates bruise fair flesh!
            Carry her southward, palled in purple,
            Weeping, weeping, weeping, weeping,
    What had their rocks to do with roses? Body and soul she was all one rose.

    Thus, through the summer night, slowly they went,
    We three behind,--the pedlar-poet and I,
    And Robin Scarlet. The moving flare that ringed
    The escutcheoned hearse, lit every leaf distinct
    Along the hedges and woke the sleeping birds,
    But drew no watchers from the drowsier farms.
    Thus, through a world of innocence and sleep,
    We brought her to the doors of her last home,
    In Peterborough Cathedral. Round her tomb
    They stood, in the huge gloom of those old aisles,
    The heralds with their torches, but their light
    Struggled in vain with that tremendous dark.
    Their ring of smoky red could only show
    A few sad faces round the purple pall,
    The wings of a stone angel overhead,
    The base of three great pillars, and, fitfully,
    Faint as the phosphorus glowing in some old vault,
    One little slab of marble, far away.
      Yet, or the darkness, or the pedlar's words
    Had made me fanciful, I thought I saw
    Bowed shadows praying in those unplumbed aisles,
    Nay, dimly heard them weeping, in a grief
    That still was built of silence, like the drip
    Of water from a frozen fountain-head.
      We laid her in her grave. We closed the tomb.
    With echoing footsteps all the funeral went;
    And I went last to close and lock the doors;
    Last, and half frightened of the enormous gloom
    That rolled along behind me as one by one
    The torches vanished. O, I was glad to see
    The moonlight on the kind turf-mounds again.
      But, as I turned the key, a quivering hand
    Was laid upon my arm. I turned and saw
    That foreigner with the olive-coloured face.
      From head to foot he shivered, as with cold.
    He drew me into the shadows of the porch.
    'Come back with me,' he whispered, and slid his hand
    --Like ice it was!--along my wrist, and slipped
    A ring upon my finger, muttering quick,
    As in a burning fever, 'All the wealth
    Of Eldorado for one hour! Come back!
    I must go back and see her face again!
    I was not there, not there, the day she--died.
    You'll help me with the coffin. Not a soul
    Will know. Come back! One moment, only one!'
      I thought the man was mad, and plucked my hand
    Away from him. He caught me by the sleeve,
    And sank upon his knees, lifting his face
    Most piteously to mine. 'One moment! See!
    I loved her!'
    I saw the moonlight glisten on his tears,
    Great, long, slow tears they were; and then--my God--
    As his face lifted and his head sank back
    Beseeching me--I saw a crimson thread
    Circling his throat, as though the headsman's axe
    Had cloven it with one blow, so shrewd, so keen,
    The head had slipped not from the trunk.
                                             I gasped;
    And, as he pleaded, stretching his head back,
    The wound, O like a second awful mouth,
    The wound began to gape.
                             I tore my cloak
    Out of his clutch. My keys fell with a clash.
    I left them where they lay, and with a shout
    I dashed into the broad white empty road.
    There was no soul in sight. Sweating with fear
    I hastened home, not daring to look back;
    But as I turned the corner, I heard the clang
    Of those great doors, and knew he had entered in.

    Not till I saw before me in the lane
    The pedlar and my uncle did I halt
    And look at that which clasped my finger still
    As with a band of ice.
                           My hand was bare!
    I stared at it and rubbed it. Then I thought
    I had been dreaming. There had been no ring!
    The poor man I had left there in the porch,
    Being a Frenchman, talked a little wild;
    But only wished to look upon her grave.
    And I--I was the madman! So I said
    Nothing. But all the same, for all my thoughts,
    I'd not go back that night to find the keys,
    No, not for all the rubies in the crown
    Of Prester John.

       *   *   *   *

                     The high State Funeral
    Was held on Lammas Day. A wondrous sight
    For Peterborough! For myself, I found
    Small satisfaction in a catafalque
    That carried a dummy coffin. None the less,
    The pedlar thought that as a Solemn Masque,
    Or Piece of Purple Pomp, the thing was good,
    And worthy of a picture in his rhymes;
    The more because he said it shadowed forth
    The ironic face of Death.
                              The Masque, indeed
    Began before we buried her. For a host
    Of Mourners--Lords and Ladies--on Lammas eve
    Panting with eagerness of pride and place,
    Arrived in readiness for the morrow's pomp,
    And at the Bishop's Palace they found prepared
    A mighty supper for them, where they sat
    All at one table. In a Chamber hung
    With 'scutcheons and black cloth, they drank red wine
    And feasted, while the torches and the Queen
    Crept through the darkness of Northampton lanes.

    At seven o'clock on Lammas Morn they woke,
    After the Queen was buried; and at eight
    The Masque set forth, thus pictured in the rhymes
    With tolling bells, which on the pedlar's lips
    Had more than paid his lodging: Thus he spake it,
    Slowly, sounding the rhymes like solemn bells,
    And tolling, in between, with lingering tongue:--

    _Toll!_--From the Palace the Releevants creep,--
      A hundred poor old women, nigh their end,
    Wearing their black cloth gowns, and on each head
    An ell of snow-white holland which, some said,
                      Afterwards they might keep,
    --_Ah, Toll!_--with nine new shillings each to spend,
      For all the trouble that they had, and all
      The sorrow of walking to this funeral.

    _Toll!_--And the Mourning Cloaks in purple streamed
      Following, a long procession, two by two,
    Her Household first. With these, Monsieur du Preau
    Her French Confessor, unafraid to show
                      The golden Cross that gleamed
    About his neck, warned what the crowd might do
      Said _I will wear it, though I die for it!_
      So subtle in malice was that Jesuit.

    _Toll!_--Sir George Savile in his Mourner's Gown
      Carried the solemn Cross upon a Field
    Azure, and under it by a streamer borne
    Upon a field of Gules, an Unicorn
                      Argent and, lower down,
    A scrolled device upon a blazoned shield,
      Which seemed to say--I AM SILENT TILL THE END!--
      _Toll! Toll!_--IN MY DEFENCE, GOD ME DEFEND!

    _Toll!_--and a hundred poor old men went by,
      Followed by two great Bishops.--_Toll, ah toll!_--
    Then, with White Staves and Gowns, four noble lords;
    Then sixteen Scots and Frenchmen with drawn swords;
                      Then, with a Bannerol,
    Sir Andrew Noel, lifting to the sky
      The Great Red Lion. Then the Crown and Crest
      Borne by a Herald on his glittering breast.

    And now--ah now, indeed, the deep bell tolls--
      That empty Coffin, with its velvet pall,
    Borne by six Gentlemen, under a canopy
    Of purple, lifted by four knights, goes by.

                      The Crown Imperial
    Burns on the Coffin-head. Four Bannerols
      On either side, uplifted by four squires,
      Roll on the wind their rich heraldic fires.
    _Toll!_ The Chief Mourner--the fair Russell!--_toll!_--
      Countess of Bedford--_toll!_--they bring her now,
    Weeping under a purple Cloth of State,
    Till, halting there before the Minister Gate,
                      Having in her control
    The fair White Staves of office, with a bow
      She gives them to her two great Earls again,
      Then sweeps them onward in her mournful train.

    _Toll!_ At the high Cathedral door the Quires
      Meet them and lead them, singing all the while
    A mighty _Miserere_ for her soul!
    Then, as the rolling organ--_toll, ah toll!_--
                      Floods every glimmering aisle
    With ocean-thunders, all those knights and squires
      Bring the false Coffin to the central nave
      And set it in the Catafalque o'er her grave.

    The Catafalque was made in Field-bed wise
      Valanced with midnight purple, fringed with gold:
    All the Chief Mourners on dark thrones were set
    Within it, as jewels in some huge carcanet:
                      Above was this device
    IN MY DEFENCE, GOD ME DEFEND, inscrolled
      Round the rich Arms of Scotland, as to say
      "Man judged me. I abide the Judgment Day."

    The sexton paused anew. All looked at him,
    And at his wrinkled, grim, earth-coloured hand,
    As if, in that dim light, beclouded now
    With blue tobacco-smoke, they thought to see
    The smouldering ruby again.
                                "Ye know," he said,
    "How master William Wickham preached that day?"
    Ford nodded. "I have heard of it. He showed
    Subtly, O very subtly, after his kind,
    That the white Body of Beauty such as hers
    Was in itself Papistical, a feast,
    A fast, an incense, a burnt-offering,
    And an Abomination in the sight
    Of all true Protestants. Why, her very name
    Was Mary!"
               "Ay, that's true, that's very true!"
    The sexton mused. "Now that's a strange deep thought!
    The Bishop missed a text in missing that.
    Her name, indeed, was Mary!"
                                 "Did you find
    Your keys again?" "Ay, Sir, I found them!" "Where?"
    "Strange you should ask me that! After the throng
    Departed, and the Nobles were at feast,
    All in the Bishop's Palace--a great feast
    And worthy of their sorrow--I came back
    Carrying my uncle's second bunch of keys
    To lock the doors and search, too, for mine own.
    'Twas growing dusk already, and as I thrust
    The key into the lock, the great grey porch
    Grew cold upon me, like a tomb.
                                    I pushed
    Hard at the key--then stopped--with all my flesh
    Freezing, and half in mind to fly; for, sirs,
    The door was locked already, and--_from within_!
    I drew the key forth quietly and stepped back
    Into the Churchyard, where the graves were warm
    With sunset still, and the blunt carven stones
    Lengthened their homely shadows, out and out,
    To Everlasting. Then I plucked up heart,
    Seeing the footprints of that mighty Masque
    Along the pebbled path. A queer thought came
    Into my head that all the world without
    Was but a Masque, and I was creeping back,
    Back from the Mourner's Feast to Truth again.
    Yet--I grew bold, and tried the Southern door.
      'Twas locked, but held no key on the inner side
    To foil my own, and softly, softly, click,
    I turned it, and with heart, sirs, in my mouth,
    Pushed back the studded door and entered in ...
      Stepped straight out of the world, I might have said,
    Out of the dusk into a night so deep,
    So dark, I trembled like a child....
                                         And then
    I was aware, sirs, of a great sweet wave
    Of incense. All the gloom was heavy with it,
    As if her Papist Household had returned
    To pray for her poor soul; and, my fear went.
    But either that strange incense weighed me down,
    Or else from being sorely over-tasked,
    A languor came upon me, and sitting there
    To breathe a moment, in a velvet stall,
    I closed mine eyes.
                        A moment, and no more,
    For then I heard a rustling in the nave,
    And opened them; and, very far away,
    As if across the world, in Rome herself,
    I saw twelve tapers in the solemn East,
    And saw, or thought I saw, cowled figures kneel
    Before them, in an incense-cloud.
                                      And then,
    Maybe the sunset deepened in the world
    Of masques without--clear proof that I had closed
    Mine eyes but for a moment, sirs, I saw
    As if across a world-without-end tomb,
    A tiny jewelled glow of crimson panes
    Darkening and brightening with the West.
                                             And then,
    Then I saw something more--Queen Mary's vault,
    And--it was open!...
                         Then, I heard a voice,
    A strange deep broken voice, whispering love
    In soft French words, that clasped and clung like hands;
    And then--two shadows passed against the West,
    Two blurs of black against that crimson stain,
    Slowly, O very slowly, with bowed heads,
    Leaning together, and vanished into the dark
    Beyond the Catafalque.
                           Then--I heard him pray,--
    And knew him for the man that prayed to me,--
    Pray as a man prays for his love's last breath!
    And then, O sirs, it caught me by the throat,
    And I, too, dropped upon my knees and prayed;
    For, as in answer to his prayer, there came
    A moan of music, a mighty shuddering sound
    From the great organ, a sound that rose and fell
    Like seas in anger, very far away;
    And then a peal of thunder, and then it seemed,
    As if the graves were giving up their dead,
    A great cowled host of shadows rose and sang;--

                _Dies iræ, dies illâ
                Solvet sæclum in favilla,
                Teste David cum Sibylla._

    I heard her sad, sad, little, broken voice,
    Out in the darkness. 'Ay, and David, too,
    His blood is on the floors of Holyrood,
    To speak for me.' Then that great ocean-sound
    Swelled to a thunder again, and heaven and earth
    Shrivelled away; and in that huge slow hymn
    Chariots were driven forth in flaming rows,
    And terrible trumpets blown from deep to deep.

    And then, ah then, the heart of heaven was hushed,
    And--in the hush--it seemed an angel wept,
    Another Mary wept, and gathering up
    All our poor wounded, weary, way-worn world,
    Even as a Mother gathers up her babe,
    Soothed it against her breast, and rained her tears
    On the pierced feet of God, and melted Him
    To pity, and over His feet poured her deep hair.
    The music died away. The shadows knelt.
    And then--I heard a rustling nigh the tomb,
    And heard--and heard--or dreamed I heard--farewells,
    Farewells for everlasting, deep farewells,
    Bitter as blood, darker than any death.
    And, at the last, as in a kiss, one breath,
    One agony of sweetness, like a sword
    For sharpness, drawn along a soft white throat;
    And, for its terrible sweetness, like a sigh
    Across great waters, very far away,--
    _Sweetheart!_

    And then, like doors, like world-without-end doors
    That shut for Everlasting, came a clang,
    And ringing, echoing, through the echo of it,
    One terrible cry that plucked my heart-strings out,
    _Mary!_ And on the closed and silent tomb,
    Where there were two, one shuddering shadow lay,
    And then--I, too,--reeled, swooned and knew no more.

    Sirs, when I woke, there was a broad bright shaft
    Of moonlight, slanting through an Eastern pane
    Full on her tomb and that black Catafalque.
    And on the tomb there lay--my bunch of keys!
    I struggled to my feet,
    Ashamed of my wild fancies, like a man
    Awakening from a drunken dream. And yet,
    When I picked up the keys, although that storm
    Of terror had all blown by and left me calm,
    I lifted up mine eyes to see the scroll
    Round the rich crest of that dark canopy,
    IN MY DEFENCE, GOD ME DEFEND. The moon
    Struck full upon it; and, as I turned and went,
    God help me, sirs, though I were loyal enough
    To good Queen Bess, I could not help but say,
    _Amen!_
    And yet, methought it was not I that spake,
    But some deep soul that used me for a mask,
    A soul that rose up in this hollow shell
    Like dark sea-tides flooding an empty cave.
    I could not help but say with my poor lips,
    _Amen! Amen!_
                       Sirs, 'tis a terrible thing
    To move in great events. Since that strange night
    I have not been as other men. The tides
    Would rise in this dark cave"--he tapped his skull--
    "Deep tides, I know not whence; and when they rose
    My friends looked strangely upon me and stood aloof.
    And once, my uncle said to me--indeed,
    It troubled me strangely,--'Timothy,' he said,
    'Thou art translated! I could well believe
    Thou art two men, whereof the one's a fool,
    The other a prophet. Or else, beneath thy skin
    There lurks a changeling! What hath come to thee?'
    And then, sirs, then--well I remember it!
    'Twas on a summer eve, and we walked home
    Between high ghostly hedges white with may--
    And uncle Robin, in his holy-day suit
    Of Reading Tawny, felt his old heart swell
    With pride in his great memories. He began
    Chanting the pedlar's tune, keeping the time
    Thus, jingle, jingle, slowly, with his keys:--


    I

        Douglas, in the moonless night
          --_Muffled oars on blue Loch Leven!_--
        Took her hand, a flake of white
          --_Beauty slides the bolts of heaven._--
        Little white hand, like a flake of snow,
          When they saw it, his Highland crew
        Swung together and murmured low,
          "Douglas, wilt _thou_ die then, too?"
        And the pine trees whispered, weeping,
          "_Douglas, Douglas, tender and true!_
    Little white hand like a tender moonbeam, soon shall you set the
        broadswords leaping,
      It is the Queen, the Queen!" they whispered, watching her soar to
          the saddle anew.
    "There will be trumpets blown in the mountains, a mist of blood on the
        heather, and weeping,
      Weeping, weeping, and _thou_, too, dead for her, Douglas, Douglas,
          tender and true."


    II

            Carry the queenly lass along!
              --_Cold she lies, cold and dead,_--
            She whose laughter was a song,
              --_Lapped around with sheets of lead!_--
            She whose blood was wine of the South,
              --_Light her down to a couch of clay!_--
            And a royal rose her mouth,
              And her body made of may!
            --Lift your torches, weeping, weeping,
              Light her down to a couch of clay.
    They should have left her in her vineyards, left her heart to her
        land's own keeping,
      Left her white breast room to breathe, and left her light foot
          free to dance!

    Hush! Between the solemn pinewoods, carry the lovely lady sleeping,
      Out of the cold grey Northern mists, with banner and scutcheon,
          plume, and lance,
    Carry her southward, palled in purple, weeping, weeping, weeping, weeping,--
                    _O, ma patrie,
                    La plus chérie,
            Adieu, plaisant pays de France!_


    Well, sirs, that dark tide rose within my brain!
    I snatched his keys and flung them over the hedge,
    Then flung myself down on a bank of ferns
    And wept and wept and wept.
                                It puzzled him.
    Perchance he feared my mind was going and yet,
    O, sirs, if you consider it rightly now,
    With all those ages knocking at his doors,
    With all that custom clamouring for his care,
    Is it so strange a grave-digger should weep?
    Well--he was kind enough and heaped my plate
    That night at supper.
    But I could never dig my graves at ease
    In Peterborough Churchyard. So I came
    To London--to St. Mary Magdalen's.
    And thus, I chanced to drink my ale one night
    Here in the Mermaid Inn. 'Twas All Souls' Eve,
    And, on that bench, where master Ford now sits
    Was master Shakespeare--
    Well, the lights burned low,
    And just like master Ford to-night he leaned
    Suddenly forward. 'Timothy,' he said,
    'That's a most marvellous ruby!'
                                     My blood froze!
    I stretched my hand out bare as it was born;
    And he said nothing, only looked at me.
    Then, seeing my pipe was empty, he bade me fill
    And lit it for me.
                       Peach, the astrologer,
    Was living then; and that same night I went
    And told him all my trouble about this ring.
    He took my hand in his, and held it--thus--
    Then looked into my face and said this rhyme:--

            _The ruby ring, that only three
            While Time and Tide go by, shall see,
            Weds your hand to history._

            _Honour and pride the first shall lend;
            The second shall give you gold to spend;
            The third--shall warn you of your end._

    Peach was a rogue, some say, and yet he spake
    Most truly about the first," the sexton mused,
    "For master Shakespeare, though they say in youth
    Outside the theatres, he would hold your horse
    For pence, prospered at last, bought a fine house
    In Stratford, lived there like a squire, they say.
    And here, here he would sit, for all the world
    As he were but a poet! God bless us all,
    And then--to think!--he rose to be a squire!
    A deep one, masters! Well, he lit my pipe!"
    "Why did they bury such a queen by night?"
    Said Ford. "Kings might have wept for her. Did Death
    Play epicure and glutton that so few
    Were bidden to such a feast. Once on a time,
    I could have wept, myself, to hear a tale
    Of beauty buried in the dark. And hers
    Was loveliness, far, far beyond the common!
    Such beauty should be marble to the touch
    Of time, and clad in purple to amaze
    The moth. But she was kind and soft and fair,
    A woman, and so she died. But, why the dark?"

    "Sir, they gave out the coffin was too heavy
    For gentlemen to bear!"--"For kings to bear?"
    Ford flashed at him. The sexton shook his head,--
    "Nay! Gentlemen to bear! But--the true cause--
    Ah, sir, 'tis unbelievable, even to me,
    A sexton, for a queen so fair of face!
    And all her beds, even as the pedlar said,
    Breathing Arabia, sirs, her walls all hung
    With woven purple wonders and great tales
    Of amorous gods, and mighty mirrors, too,
    Imaging her own softness, night and dawn,
    When through her sumptuous hair she drew the combs;
    And like one great white rose-leaf half her breast
    Shone through it, firm as ivory."
                                      "Ay," said Lodge,
    Murmuring his own rich music under breath,
    "_About her neck did all the graces throng,
    And lay such baits as did entangle death._"
    "Well, sir, the weather being hot, they feared
    She would not hold the burying!"...
                                        "In some sort,"
    Ford answered slowly, "if your tale be true,
    She did not hold it. Many a knightly crest
    Will bend yet o'er the ghost of that small hand."

    There was a hush, broken by Ben at last,
    Who turned to Ford--"How now, my golden lad?
    The astrologer's dead hand is on thy purse!"

    Ford laughed, grimly, and flung an angel down.
    "Well, cause or consequence, rhyme or no rhyme,
    There is thy gold. I will not break the spell,
    Or thou mayst live to bury us one and all!"
        "And, if I live so long," the old man replied,
    Lighting his lanthorn, "you may trust me, sirs,
    Mine Inn is quiet, and I can find you beds
    Where Queens might sleep all night and never move.
    Good-night, sirs, and God bless you, one and all."
      He shouldered pick and spade. I opened the door.
    The snow blew in, and, as he shuffled out,
    There, in the strait dark passage, I could swear
    I saw a spark of red upon his hand,
    Like a great smouldering ruby.
                                   I gasped. He stopped.
    He peered at me.
                     "Twice in a night," he said.
    "Nothing," I answered, "only the lanthorn-light."
    He shook his head. "I'll tell you something more!
    There's nothing, nothing now in life or death
    That frightens me. Ah, things used to frighten me.
    But never now. I thought I had ten years;
    But if the warning comes and says '_Thou fool,
    This night!_' Why, then, I'm ready."
                                            I watched him go,
    With glimmering lanthorn up the narrow street,
    Like one that walked upon the clouds, through snow
    That seemed to mix the City with the skies.

    On Christmas Eve we heard that he was dead.


VIII

FLOS MERCATORUM

    FLOS MERCATORUM! On that night of nights
    We drew from out our Mermaid cellarage
    All the old glory of London in one cask
    Of magic vintage. Never a city on earth--
    Rome, Paris, Florence, Bagdad--held for Ben
    The colours of old London; and, that night,
    We staved them like a wine, and drank, drank deep!

    'Twas Master Heywood, whom the Mermaid Inn
    Had dubbed our London laureate, hauled the cask
    Out of its ancient harbourage. "Ben," he cried,
    Bustling into the room with Dekker and Brome,
    "The prentices are up!" Ben raised his head
    Out of the chimney-corner where he drowsed,
    And listened, reaching slowly for his pipe.

    "_Clerk of the Bow Bell_," all along the Cheape
    There came a shout that swelled into a roar.
      "What! Will they storm the Mermaid?" Heywood laughed,
    "They are turning into Bread Street!"
                                          Down they came!
    We heard them hooting round the poor old Clerk--
    "Clubs! Clubs! The rogue would have us work all night!
    He rang ten minutes late! Fifteen, by Paul's!"
    And over the hubbub rose, like a thin bell,
    The Clerk's entreaty--"Now, good boys, good boys,
    Children of Cheape, be still, I do beseech you!
    I took some forty winks, but then...." A roar
    Of wrathful laughter drowned him--"Forty winks!
    Remember Black May-day! We'll make you wink!"
    There was a scuffle, and into the tavern rushed
    Gregory Clopton, Clerk of the Bow Bell,--
    A tall thin man, with yellow hair a-stream,
    And blazing eyes.
                      "Hide me," he clamoured, "quick!
    These picaroons will murder me!"
                                     I closed
    The thick oak doors against the coloured storm
    Of prentices in red and green and ray,
    Saffron and Reading tawny. Twenty clubs
    Drubbed on the panels as I barred them out;
    And even our walls and shutters could not drown
    Their song that, like a mocking peal of bells,
    Under our windows, made all Bread Street ring:--

                "_Clerk of the Bow Bell,
                  With the yellow locks,
                For thy late ringing
                  Thy head shall have knocks!_"

    Then Heywood, seeing the Clerk was all a-quake,
    Went to an upper casement that o'er-looked
    The whole of Bread Street. Heywood knew their ways,
    And parleyed with them till their anger turned
    To shouts of merriment. Then, like one deep bell
    His voice rang out, in answer to their peal:--

                "_Children of Cheape,
                  Hold you all still!
                You shall have Bow Bell
                  Rung at your will!_"

    Loudly they cheered him. Courteously he bowed,
    Then firmly shut the window; and, ere I filled
    His cup with sack again, the crowd had gone.

    "My clochard, sirs, is warm," quavered the Clerk.
    "I do confess I took some forty winks!
    They are good lads, our prentices of Cheape,
    But hasty!"
                "Wine!" said Ben. He filled a cup
    And thrust it into Gregory's trembling hands.
    "Yours is a task," said Dekker, "a great task!
    You sit among the gods, a lord of time,
    Measuring out the pulse of London's heart."
      "Yea, sir, above the hours and days and years,
    I sometimes think. 'Tis a great Bell--the Bow!
    And hath been, since the days of Whittington."
      "The good old days," growled Ben. "Both good and bad
    Were measured by my Bell," the Clerk replied.
    And, while he spoke, warmed by the wine, his voice
    Mellowed and floated up and down the scale
    As if the music of the London bells
    Lingered upon his tongue. "I know them all,
    And love them, all the voices of the bells.

    FLOS MERCATORUM! That's the Bell of Bow
    Remembering Richard Whittington. You should hear
    The bells of London when they tell his tale.
    Once, after hearing them, I wrote it down.
    I know the tale by heart now, every turn."
      "Then ring it out," said Heywood.
                                        Gregory smiled
    And cleared his throat.
                            "You must imagine, sirs,
    The Clerk, sitting on high, among the clouds,
    With London spread beneath him like a map.
    Under his tower, a flock of prentices
    Calling like bells, of little size or weight,
    But bells no less, ask that the Bell of Bow
    Shall tell the tale of Richard Whittington,
    As thus."
              Then Gregory Clopton, mellowing all
    The chiming vowels, and dwelling on every tone
    In rhythm or rhyme that helped to swell the peal
    Or keep the ringing measure, beat for beat,
    Chanted this legend of the London bells:--

    Clerk of the Bow Bell, four and twenty prentices,
      All upon a Hallowe'en, we prithee, for our joy,
    Ring a little turn again for sweet Dick Whittington,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, and a barefoot boy!--

    "Children of Cheape," did that old Clerk answer,
      "You will have a peal, then, for well may you know,
    All the bells of London remember Richard Whittington
      When they hear the voice of the big Bell of Bow!"--

    Clerk with the yellow locks, mellow be thy malmsey!
      He was once a prentice, and carolled in the Strand!
    Ay, and we are all, too, Marchaunt Adventurers,
      Prentices of London, and lords of Engeland.

    "Children of Cheape," did that old Clerk answer,
      "Hold you, ah hold you, ah hold you all still!
    Souling if you come to the glory of a Prentice,
      You shall have the Bow Bell rung at your will!"

    "Whittington! Whittington! O, turn again, Whittington,
      Lord Mayor of London," the big Bell began:
    "Where was he born? O, at Pauntley in Gloucestershire
      Hard by Cold Ashton, Cold Ashton," it ran.

    "_Flos Mercatorum_," moaned the bell of All Hallowes,
      "There was he an orphan, O, a little lad alone!"
    "Then we all sang," echoed happy St. Saviour's,
      "Called him, and lured him, and made him our own.

    Told him a tale as he lay upon the hillside,
      Looking on his home in the meadow-lands below!"
    "Told him a tale," clanged the bell of Cold Abbey;
      "Told him the truth," boomed the big Bell of Bow!

    Sang of a City that was like a blazoned missal-book,
      Black with oaken gables, carven and inscrolled;
    Every street a coloured page, and every sign a hieroglyph,
      Dusky with enchantments, a City paved with gold;

    "Younger son, younger son, up with stick and bundle!"--
      Even so we rung for him--"But--kneel before you go;
    Watch by your shield, lad, in little Pauntley Chancel,
      Look upon the painted panes that hold your Arms a-glow,--

    Coat of Gules and Azure; but the proud will not remember it!
      And the Crest a Lion's Head, until the new be won!
    Far away, remember it! And O, remember this, too,--
      Every barefoot boy on earth is but a younger son."

    Proudly he answered us, beneath the painted window,--
      "Though I be a younger son, the glory falls to me:
    While my brother bideth by a little land in Gloucestershire,
      All the open Earth is mine, and all the Ocean-sea.

    Yet will I remember, yet will I remember,
      By the chivalry of God, until my day be done,
    When I meet a gentle heart, lonely and unshielded,
      Every barefoot boy on earth is but a younger son!"

    Then he looked to Northward for the tall ships of Bristol;
      Far away, and cold as death, he saw the Severn shine:
    Then he looked to Eastward, and he saw a string of colours
      Trickling through the grey hills, like elfin drops of wine;

    Down along the Mendip dale, the chapmen and their horses,
      Far away, and carrying each its little coloured load,
    Winding like a fairy-tale, with pack and corded bundle,
      Trickled like a crimson thread along the silver road.

    Quick he ran to meet them, stick and bundle on his shoulder!
      Over by Cold Ashton, he met them trampling down,--
    White shaggy horses with their packs of purple spicery,
      Crimson kegs of malmsey, and the silks of London town.

    When the chapmen asked of him the bridle-path to Dorset,
      Blithely he showed them, and he led them on their way,
    Led them through the fern with their bales of breathing Araby,
      Led them to a bridle-path that saved them half a day.

    Merrily shook the silver bells that hung the broidered bridle-rein,
      Chiming to his hand, as he led them through the fern,
    Down to deep Dorset, and the wooded Isle of Purbeck,
      Then--by little Kimmeridge--they led him turn for turn.

    Down by little Kimmeridge, and up by Hampshire forest-roads,
      Round by Sussex violets, and apple-bloom of Kent,
    Singing songs of London, telling tales of London,
      All the way to London, with packs of wool they went.

    "London was London, then! A clean, clear moat
    Girdled her walls that measured, round about,
    Three miles or less. She is big and dirty now,"
    Said Dekker.
                 "Call it a silver moat," growled Ben,
    "That's the new poetry! Call it crystal, lad!
    But, till you kiss the Beast, you'll never find
    Your Fairy Prince. Why, all those crowded streets,
    Flung all their filth, their refuse, rags and bones,
    Dead cats and dogs, into your clean clear moat,
    And made it sluggish as old Acheron.
    Fevers and plagues, death in a thousand shapes
    Crawled out of it. London was dirty, lad;
    And till you kiss that fact, you'll never see
    The glory of this old Jerusalem!"
      "Ay, 'tis the fogs that make the sunset red,"
    Answered Tom Heywood. "London is earthy, coarse,
    Grimy and grand. You must make dirt the ground,
    Or lose the colours of friend Clopton's tale.
    Ring on!" And, nothing loth, the Clerk resumed:--

    Bravely swelled his heart to see the moat of London glittering
      Round her mighty wall--they told him--two miles long!
    Then--he gasped as, echoing in by grim black Aldgate,
      Suddenly their shaggy nags were nodding through a throng:

    Prentices in red and ray, marchaunts in their saffron,
      Aldermen in violets, and minstrels in white,
    Clerks in homely hoods of budge, and wives with crimson wimples,
      Thronging as to welcome him that happy summer night.

    "Back," they cried, and "Clear the way," and caught the ringing
        bridle-reins:
      "Wait! the Watch is going by, this vigil of St. John!"
    Merrily laughed the chapmen then, reining their great white horses back,
      "When the pageant passes, lad, we'll up and follow on!"

    There, as thick the crowd surged, beneath the blossomed ale-poles,
      Lifting up to Whittington a fair face afraid,
    Swept against his horse by a billow of madcap prentices,
      Hard against the stirrup breathed a green-gowned maid.

    Swift he drew her up and up, and throned her there before him,
      High above the throng with her laughing April eyes,
    Like a Queen of Faërie on the great pack-saddle.
      "Hey!" laughed the chapmen, "the prentice wins the prize!"

    "Whittington! Whittington! the world is all before you!"
      Blithely rang the bells and the steeples rocked and reeled!
    Then--he saw her eyes grow wide, and, all along by Leaden Hall,
      Drums rolled, earth shook, and shattering trumpets pealed.

    Like a marching sunset, there, from Leaden Hall to Aldgate,
      Flared the crimson cressets--O, her brows were haloed then!--
    Then the stirring steeds went by with all their mounted trumpeters,
      Then, in ringing harness, a thousand marching men.

    Marching--marching--his heart and all the halberdiers,
      And his pulses throbbing with the throbbing of the drums;
    Marching--marching--his blood and all the burganets!
      "Look," she cried, "O, look," she cried, "and now the morrice comes!"

    Dancing--dancing--her eyes and all the Lincoln Green,
      Robin Hood and Friar Tuck, dancing through the town!
    "Where is Marian?" Laughingly she turned to Richard Whittington.
      "Here," he said, and pointed to her own green gown.

    Dancing--dancing--her heart and all the morrice-bells!
      Then there burst a mighty shout from thrice a thousand throats!
    Then, with all their bows bent, and sheaves of peacock arrows,
      Marched the tall archers in their white silk coats,

    White silk coats, with the crest of London City
      Crimson on the shoulder, a sign for all to read,--
    Marching--marching--and then the sworded henchmen,
      Then, William Walworth, on his great stirring steed.

    _Flos Mercatorum_, ay, the fish-monger, Walworth,--
      He whose nets of silk drew the silver from the tide,
    He who saved the king when the king was but a prentice,--
      Lord Mayor of London, with his sword at his side!

    Burned with magic changes, his blood and all the pageantry;
      Burned with deep sea-changes, the wonder in her eyes;
    _Flos Mercatorum!_ 'Twas the rose-mary of Paphos,
      Reddening all the City for the prentice and his prize!

    All the book of London, the pages of adventure,
      Passed before the prentice on that vigil of St. John:
    Then the chapmen shook their reins,--"We'll ride behind the revelry,
      Round again to Cornhill! Up, and follow on!"

    Riding on his pack-horse, above the shouting multitude,
      There she turned and smiled at him, and thanked him for his grace:
    "Let me down by _Red Rose Lane_," and, like a wave of twilight
      While she spoke, her shadowy hair--touched his tingling face.

    When they came to _Red Rose Lane_, beneath the blossomed ale-poles,
      Light along his arm she lay, a moment, leaping down:
    Then she waved "farewell" to him, and down the Lane he watched her
      Flitting through the darkness in her gay green gown.

    All along the Cheape, as he rode among the chapmen,
      Round by _Black Friars_, to the _Two-Necked Swan_
    Coloured like the sunset, prentices and maidens
      Danced for red roses on the vigil of St. John.

    Over them were jewelled lamps in great black galleries,
      Garlanded with beauty, and burning all the night;
    All the doors were shadowy with orpin and St. John's wort,
      Long fennel, green birch, and lilies of delight.

    "He should have slept here at the Mermaid Inn,"
    Said Heywood as the chanter paused for breath.
    "What? Has our Mermaid sung so long?" cried Ben.
    "Her beams are black enough. There was an Inn,"
    Said Tom, "that bore the name; and through its heart
    There flowed the right old purple. I like to think
    It was the same, where Lydgate took his ease
    After his hood was stolen; and Gower, perchance;
    And, though he loved the _Tabard_ for a-while,
    I like to think the Father of us all,
    The old Adam of English minstrelsy caroused
    Here in the Mermaid Tavern. I like to think
    Jolly Dan Chaucer, with his kind shrewd face
    Fresh as an apple above his fur-fringed gown,
    One plump hand sporting with his golden chain,
    Looked out from that old casement over the sign,
    And saw the pageant, and the shaggy nags,
    With Whittington, and his green-gowned maid, go by.
      "O, very like," said Clopton, "for the bells
    Left not a head indoors that night." He drank
    A draught of malmsey--and thus renewed his tale:--

    "_Flos Mercatorum_," mourned the bell of All Hallowes,
      "There was he an orphan, O, a little lad alone,
    Rubbing down the great white horses for a supper!"
      "True," boomed the Bow Bell, "his hands were his own!"

    Where did he sleep? On a plump white wool-pack,
      Open to the moon on that vigil of St. John,
    Sheltered from the dew, where the black-timbered gallery
      Frowned above the yard of the _Two-Necked Swan_.

    Early in the morning, clanged the bell of St. Martin's,
      Early in the morning, with a groat in his hand,
    Mournfully he parted with the jolly-hearted chapmen,
      Shouldered his bundle and walked into the _Strand_;

    Walked into the _Strand_, and back again to _West Cheape_,
      Staring at the wizardry of every painted sign,
    Dazed with the steeples and the rich heraldic cornices
      Drinking in the colours of the Cheape like wine.

    All about the booths now, the parti-coloured prentices
      Fluted like a flock of birds along a summer lane,
    Green linnets, red caps, and gay gold finches,--
      _What d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack again?_

    "Buy my dainty doublets, cut on double taffetas,
      Buy my Paris thread," they cried, and caught him by the hand,
    "Laces for your Heart's-Delight, and lawns to make her love you,
      Cambric for her wimple, O, the finest in the land."

    Ah, but he was hungry, foot-sore, weary,
      Knocking at the doors of the armourers that day!
    _What d'ye lack?_ they asked of him; but no man lacked a prentice:
      When he told them what he lacked, they frowned and turned away.

    Hard was his bed that night, beneath a cruel archway,
      Down among the hulks, with his heart growing cold!
    London is a rare town, but O, the streets of London,
      Red though their flints be, they are not red with gold.

    Pale in the dawn, ere he marched on his adventure,
      Starving for a crust, did he kneel a-while again,
    Then, upon the fourth night, he cried, O, like a wounded bird
      "Let me die, if die I must, in _Red Rose Lane_."

    Like a little wounded bird he trailed through the darkness,
      Laid him on a door-step, and then--O, like a breath
    Pitifully blowing out his life's little rushlight,
      Came a gush of blackness, a swoon deep as death.

    Then he heard a rough voice! Then he saw a lanthorn!
      Then he saw a bearded face, and blindly wondered whose:
    Then--a marchaunt's portly legs, with great Rose-Windows,
      Bigger than St. Paul's, he thought, embroidered on his shoes.

    "Alice!" roared the voice, and then, O like a lilied angel,
      Leaning from the lighted door a fair face afraid,
    Leaning over _Red Rose Lane_, O, leaning out of Paradise,
      Drooped the sudden glory of his green-gowned maid!

       *   *   *   *

    "O, mellow be thy malmsey," grunted Ben,
    Filling the Clerk another cup.
                                   "The peal,"
    Quoth Clopton, "is not ended; but the pause
    In ringing, chimes to a deep inward ear
    And tells its own deep tale. Silence and sound,
    Darkness and light, mourning and mirth,--no tale,
    No painting, and no music, nay, no world,
    If God should cut their fruitful marriage-knot.
    A shallow sort to-day would fain deny
    A hell, sirs, to this boundless universe.
    To such I say 'no hell, no Paradise!'
    Others would fain deny the topless towers
    Of heaven, and make this earth a hell indeed.
    To such I say, 'the unplumbed gulfs of grief
    Are only theirs for whom the blissful chimes
    Ring from those unseen heights.' This earth, mid-way,
    Hangs like a belfry where the ringers grasp
    Their ropes in darkness, each in his own place,
    Each knowing, by the tune in his own heart,
    Never by sight, when he must toss through heaven
    The tone of his own bell. Those bounded souls
    Have never heard our chimes! Why, sirs, myself
    Simply by running up and down the scale
    Descend to hell or soar to heaven. My bells
    Height above height, deep below deep, respond!
    Their scale is infinite. Dare I, for one breath,
    Dream that one note hath crowned and ended all,
    Sudden I hear, far, far above those clouds,
    Like laughing angels, peal on golden peal,
    Innumerable as drops of April rain,
    Yet every note distinct, round as a pearl,
    And perfect in its place, a chime of law,
    Whose pure and boundless mere arithmetic
    Climbs with my soul to God."
                                 Ben looked at him,
    Gently. "Resume, old moralist," he said.
    "On to thy marriage-bells!"
                                "The fairy-tales
    Are wiser than they know, sirs. All our woes
    Lead on to those celestial marriage-bells.
    The world's a-wooing; and the pure City of God
    Peals for the wedding of our joy and pain!
    This was well seen of Richard Whittington;
    For only he that finds the London streets
    Paved with red flints, at last shall find them paved
    Like to the Perfect City, with pure gold.
    Ye know the world! what was a London waif
    To Hugh Fitzwarren's daughter? He was fed
    And harboured; and the cook declared she lacked
    A scullion. So, in Hugh Fitzwarren's house,
    He turned the jack, and scoured the dripping-pan.
    How could he hope for more?
                                This marchaunt's house
    Was builded like a great high-gabled inn,
    Square, with a galleried courtyard, such as now
    The players use. Its rooms were rich and dim
    With deep-set coloured panes and massy beams.
    Its ancient eaves jutted o'er _Red Rose Lane_
    Darkly, like eyebrows of a mage asleep.
    Its oaken stair coiled upward through a dusk
    Heavy with fume of scented woods that burned
    To keep the Plague away,--a gloom to embalm
    A Pharaoh, but to dull the cheek and eye
    Of country lads like Whittington.
                                      He pined
    For wind and sunlight. Yet he plied his task
    Patient as in old tales of Elfin-land,
    The young knight would unhelm his golden locks
    And play the scullion, so that he might watch
    His lady's eyes unknown, and oftener hear
    Her brook-like laughter rippling overhead;
    Her green gown, like the breath of Eden boughs,
    Rustling nigh him. And all day long he found
    Sunshine enough in this. But when at night
    He crept into the low dark vaulted den,
    The cobwebbed cellar, where the cook had strewn
    The scullion's bed of straw (and none too thick
    Lest he should sleep too long), he choked for breath;
    And, like an old man hoarding up his life,
    Fostered his glimmering rushlight as he sate
    Bolt upright, while a horrible scurry heaved
    His rustling bed, and bright black-beaded eyes
    Peered at him from the crannies of the wall.
    Then darkness whelmed him, and perchance he slept,--
    Only to fight with nightmares and to fly
    Down endless tunnels in a ghastly dream,
    Hunted by horrible human souls that took
    The shape of monstrous rats, great chattering snouts,
    Vile shapes of shadowy cunning and grey greed,
    That gnaw through beams, and undermine tall towns,
    And carry the seeds of plague and ruin and death
    Under the careless homes of sleeping men.
      Thus, in the darkness, did he wage a war
    With all the powers of darkness. 'If the light
    Do break upon me, by the grace of God,'
    So did he vow, 'O, then will I remember,
    Then, then, will I remember, ay, and help
    To build that lovelier City which is paved
    For rich and poor alike, with purest gold.'

    Ah, sirs, he kept his vow. Ye will not smile
    If, at the first, the best that he could do
    Was with his first poor penny-piece to buy
    A cat, and bring her home, under his coat
    By stealth (or else that termagant, the cook,
    Had drowned it in the water-butt, nor deemed
    The water worse to drink). So did he quell
    First his own plague, but bettered others, too.
    Now, in those days, Marchaunt Adventurers
    Shared with their prentices the happy chance
    Of each new venture. Each might have his stake,
    Little or great, upon the glowing tides
    Of high romance that washed the wharfs of Thames;
    And every lad in London had his groat
    Or splendid shilling on some fair ship at sea.

    So, on an April eve, Fitzwarren called
    His prentices together; for, ere long,
    The _Unicorn_, his tall new ship, must sail
    Beyond the world to gather gorgeous webs
    From Eastern looms, great miracles of silk
    Dipt in the dawn by wizard hands of Ind;
    Or, if they chanced upon that fabled coast
    Where Sydon, river of jewels, like a snake
    Slides down the gorge its coils of crimson fire,
    Perchance a richer cargo,--rubies, pearls,
    Or gold bars from the Gates of Paradise.
    And many a moon, at least, a faërie foam
    Would lap Blackfriars wharf, where London lads
    Gazed in the sunset down that misty reach
    For old black battered hulks and tattered sails
    Bringing their dreams home from the uncharted sea.

    And one flung down a groat--he had no more.
    One staked a shilling, one a good French crown;
    And one an angel, O, light-winged enough
    To reach Cathay; and not a lad but bought
    His pennyworth of wonder,
                              So they thought,
    Till all at once Fitzwarren's daughter cried
    'Father, you have forgot poor Whittington!'
    "Snails,' laughed the rosy marchaunt, 'but that's true!
    Fetch Whittington! The lad must stake his groat!
    'Twill bring us luck!'
                           'Whittington! Whittington!'
    Down the dark stair, like a gold-headed bird,
    Fluttered sweet Alice. 'Whittington! Richard! Quick!
    Quick with your groat now for the _Unicorn_!'

    'A groat!' cried Whittington, standing there aghast,
    With brown bare arms, still coloured by the sun,
    Among his pots and pans. 'Where should I find
    A groat? I staked my last groat in a cat!'
    --'What! Have you nothing? Nothing but a cat?
    Then stake the cat,' she said; and the quick fire
    That in a woman's mind out-runs the thought
    Of man, lit her grey eyes.
                               Whittington laughed
    And opened the cellar-door. Out sailed his wealth,
    Waving its tail, purring, and rubbing its head
    Now on his boots, now on the dainty shoe
    Of Alice, who straightway, deaf to his laughing prayers,
    Caught up the cat, whispered it, hugged it close,
    Against its grey fur leaned her glowing cheek,
    And carried it off in triumph.

                                 _Red Rose Lane_
    Echoed with laughter as, with amber eyes
    Blinking, the grey cat in a seaman's arms
    Went to the wharf. 'Ay, but we need a cat,'
    The captain said. So, when the painted ship
    Sailed through a golden sunrise down the Thames,
    A grey tail waved upon the misty poop,
    And Whittington had his venture on the seas.

    It was a nine days' jest, and soon forgot.
    But, all that year,--ah, sirs, ye know the world,
    For all the foolish boasting of the proud,
    Looks not beneath the coat of Taunton serge
    For Gules and Azure. A prince that comes in rags
    To clean your shoes and, out of his own pride,
    Waits for the world to paint his shield again
    Must wait for ever and a day.
                                     The world
    Is a great hypocrite, hypocrite most of all
    When thus it boasts its purple pride of race,
    Then with eyes blind to all but pride of place
    Tramples the scullion's heraldry underfoot,
    Nay, never sees it, never dreams of it,
    Content to know that, here and now, his coat
    Is greasy....
                  So did Whittington find at last
    Such nearness was most distant; that to see her,
    Talk with her, serve her thus, was but to lose
    True sight, true hearing.   He must save his life
    By losing it; forsake, to win, his love;
    Go out into the world to bring her home.
    It was but labour lost to clean the shoes,
    And turn the jack, and scour the dripping-pan.
    For every scolding blown about her ears
    The cook's great ladle fell upon the head
    Of Whittington; who, beneath her rule, became
    The scullery's general scapegoat.    It was he
    That burned the pie-crust, drank the hippocras,
    Dinted the silver beaker....
                                  Many a month
    He chafed, till his resolve took sudden shape
    And, out of the dark house at the peep of day,
    Shouldering bundle and stick again, he stole
    To seek his freedom, and to shake the dust
    Of London from his shoes....
                                 You know the stone
    On Highgate, where he sate awhile to rest,
    With aching heart, and thought 'I shall not see
    Her face again.' There, as the coloured dawn
    Over the sleeping City slowly bloomed,
    A small black battered ship with tattered sails
    Blurring the burnished glamour of the Thames
    Crept, side-long to a wharf.
                                 Then, all at once,
    The London bells rang out a welcome home;
    And, over them all, tossing the tenor on high,
    The Bell of Bow, a sun among the stars,
    Flooded the morning air with this refrain:--

    'Turn again, Whittington! Turn again, Whittington!
      _Flos Mercatorum_, thy ship hath come home!
    Trailing from her cross-trees the crimson of the sunrise,
      Dragging all the glory of the sunset thro' the foam.
              Turn again, Whittington,
              Turn again, Whittington,
                Lord Mayor of London!

    Turn again, Whittington! When thy hope was darkest,
      Far beyond the sky-line a ship sailed for thee.
    _Flos Mercatorum_, O, when thy faith was blindest,
      Even then thy sails were set beyond the Ocean-sea.'

    So he heard and heeded us, and turned again to London,
      Stick and bundle on his back, he turned to _Red Rose Lane_,
    Hardly hearing as he went the chatter of the prentices,--
      _What d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack again?_

    Back into the scullery, before the cook had missed him,
      Early in the morning his labours he began:
    Once again to clean the shoes and clatter with the water-pail,
      Once again to scrub the jack and scour the dripping-pan.

    All the bells of London were pealing as he laboured.
      Wildly beat his heart, and his blood began to race.
    Then--there came a light step and, suddenly, beside him
      Stood his lady Alice, with a light upon her face.

    'Quick,' she said, 'O, quick,' she said, 'they want you,
        Richard Whittington!'
      'Quick,' she said; and, while she spoke, her lighted eyes betrayed
    All that she had hidden long, and all she still would hide from him.
      So--he turned and followed her, his green-gowned maid.

       *   *   *   *

    There, in a broad dark oaken-panelled room
    Rich with black carvings and great gleaming cups
    Of silver, sirs, and massy halpace built
    Half over _Red Rose Lane_, Fitzwarren sat;
    And, at his side, O, like an old romance
    That suddenly comes true and fills the world
    With April colours, two bronzed seamen stood,
    Tattered and scarred, and stained with sun and brine.
    '_Flos Mercatorum_,' Hugh Fitzwarren cried,
    Holding both hands out to the pale-faced boy,
    'The prentice wins the prize! Why, Whittington,
    Thy cat hath caught the biggest mouse of all!'
    And, on to the table, tilting a heavy sack,
    One of the seamen poured a glittering stream
    Of rubies, emeralds, opals, amethysts,
    That turned the room to an Aladdin's cave,
    Or magic goblet brimmed with dusky wine
    Where clustering rainbow-coloured bubbles clung
    And sparkled, in the halls of Prester John.

    'And that,' said Hugh Fitzwarren, 'is the price
    Paid for your cat in Barbary, by a King
    Whose house was rich in gems, but sorely plagued
    With rats and mice. Gather it up, my lad,
    And praise your master for his honesty;
    For, though my cargo prospered, yours outshines
    The best of it. Take it, my lad, and go;
    You're a rich man; and, if you use it well,
    Riches will make you richer, and the world
    Will prosper in your own prosperity.
    The miser, like the cold and barren moon,
    Shines with a fruitless light. The spendthrift fool
    Flits like a Jack-o-Lent over quags and fens;
    But he that's wisely rich gathers his gold
    Into a fruitful and unwasting sun
    That spends its glory on a thousand fields
    And blesses all the world. Take it and go.'

    Blankly, as in a dream, Whittington stared.
    'How should I take it, sir? The ship was yours,
    And ...'
             'Ay, the ship was mine; but in that ship
    Your stake was richer than we knew. 'Tis yours.'
      'Then,' answered Whittington, 'if this wealth be mine,
    Who but an hour ago was all so poor,
    I know one way to make me richer still.'
    He gathered up the glittering sack of gems,
    Turned to the halpace, where his green-gowned maid
    Stood in the glory of the coloured panes.
    He thrust the splendid load into her arms,
    Muttering--'Take it, lady! Let me be poor!
    But rich, at least, in that you not despise
    The waif you saved.'
                        --'Despise you, Whittington?'--
    'O, no, not in the sight of God! But I
    Grow tired of waiting for the Judgment Day!
    I am but a man. I am a scullion now;
    But I would like, only for half an hour,
    To stand upright and say "I am a king!"
    Take it!'
              And, as they stood, a little apart,
    Their eyes were married in one swift level look,
    Silent, but all that souls could say was said.

       *   *   *   *

                                                   And
    'I know a way,' said the Bell of St. Martin's.
      'Tell it, and be quick,' laughed the prentices below!
    'Whittington shall marry her, marry her, marry her!
      Peal for a wedding,' said the big Bell of Bow.

    He shall take a kingdom up, and cast it on the sea again;
      He shall have his caravels to traffic for him now;
    He shall see his royal sails rolling up from Araby,
     And the crest--a honey-bee--golden at the prow.

    Whittington! Whittington! The world is all a fairy tale!--
      Even so we sang for him.--But O, the tale is true!
    Whittington he married her, and on his merry marriage-day,
      O, we sang, we sang for him, like lavrocks in the blue.

    Far away from London, these happy prentice lovers
      Wandered through the fern to his western home again,
    Down by deep Dorset to the wooded isle of Purbeck,
      Round to little Kimmeridge, by many a lover's lane.

    There did they abide as in a dove-cote hidden
      Deep in happy woods until the bells of duty rang;
    Then they rode the way he went, a barefoot boy to London,
      Round by Hampshire forest-roads, but as they rode he sang:--

    _Kimmeridge in Dorset is the happiest of places!
      All the little homesteads are thatched with beauty there!
    All the old ploughmen, there, have happy smiling faces,
      Christmas roses in their cheeks, and crowns of silver hair.

    Blue as are the eggs in the nest of the hedge-sparrow,
      Gleam the little rooms in the homestead that I know:
    Death, I think, has lost the way to Kimmeridge in Dorset;
      Sorrow never knew it, or forgot it, long ago!

    Kimmeridge in Dorset, Kimmeridge in Dorset,
      Though I may not see you more thro' all the years to be,
    Yet will I remember the little happy homestead
      Hidden in that Paradise where God was good to me._

       *   *   *   *

    So they turned to London, and with mind and soul he laboured,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, for the mighty years to be,
    Fashioning, for profit--to the years that should forget him!--
      This, our sacred City that must shine upon the sea.

    London was a City when the Poulters ruled the Poultry!
      Rosaries of prayer were hung in Paternoster Row,
    Gutter Lane was Guthrun's, then; and, bright with painted missal-books,
      _Ave Mary Corner_, sirs, was fairer than ye know.

    London was mighty when her marchaunts loved their merchandise,
      Bales of Eastern magic that empurpled wharf and quay:
    London was mighty when her booths were a dream-market,
      Loaded with the colours of the sunset and the sea.

    There, in all their glory, with the Virgin on their bannerols,
      Glory out of Genoa, the Mercers might be seen,
    Walking to their Company of Marchaunt Adventurers;--
      Gallantly they jetted it in scarlet and in green.

    There, in all the glory of the lordly Linen Armourers,
      Walked the Marchaunt Taylors with the Pilgrim of their trade,
    Fresh from adventuring in Italy and Flanders,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, for a green-gowned maid.

    _Flos Mercatorum!_ Can a good thing come of Nazareth?
      High above the darkness, where our duller senses drown,
    Lifts the splendid Vision of a City, built on merchandise,
      Fairer than that City of Light that wore the violet crown,

    Lifts the sacred vision of a far-resplendent City,
      Flashing, like the heart of heaven, its messages afar,
    Trafficking, as God Himself through all His interchanging worlds,
      Holding up the scales of law, weighing star by star,

    Stern as Justice, in one hand the sword of Truth and Righteousness;
      Blind as Justice, in one hand the everlasting scales,
    Lifts the sacred Vision of that City from the darkness,
      Whence the thoughts of men break out, like blossoms, or like sails!

    Ordered and harmonious, a City built to music,
      Lifting, out of chaos, the shining towers of law,--
    Ay, a sacred City, and a City built of merchandise,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, was the City that he saw.

    And by that light," quoth Clopton, "did he keep
    His promise. He was rich; but in his will
    He wrote those words which should be blazed with gold
    In London's _Liber Albus_:--

                                     _The desire
        And busy intention of a man, devout
        And wise, should be to fore-cast and secure
        The state and end of this short life with deeds
        Of mercy and pity, especially to provide
        For those whom poverty insulteth, those
        To whom the power of labouring for the needs
        Of life, is interdicted._
                                 He became
    The Father of the City. Felons died
    Of fever in old Newgate. He rebuilt
    The prison. London sickened, from the lack
    Of water, and he made fresh fountains flow.
    He heard the cry of suffering and disease,
    And built the stately hospital that still
    Shines like an angel's lanthorn through the night,
    The stately halls of St. Bartholomew.
    He saw men wrapt in ignorance, and he raised
    Schools, colleges, and libraries. He heard
    The cry of the old and weary, and he built
    Houses of refuge.
                      Even so he kept
    His prentice vows of Duty, Industry,
    Obedience, words contemned of every fool
    Who shrinks from law; yet were those ancient vows
    The adamantine pillars of the State.
    Let all who play their Samson be well warned
    That Samsons perish, too!
                              His monument
    Is London!"

                   "True," quoth Dekker, "and he deserves
    Well of the Mermaid Inn for one good law,
    Rightly enforced. He pilloried that rogue
    Will Horold, who in Whittington's third year
    Of office, as Lord Mayor, placed certain gums
    And spices in great casks, and filled them up
    With feeble Spanish wine, to have the taste
    And smell of Romeney,--Malmsey!"
                                      "Honest wine,
    Indeed," replied the Clerk, "concerns the State,
    That solemn structure touched with light from heaven,
    Which he, our merchant, helped to build on earth.
    And, while he laboured for it, all things else
    Were added unto him, until the bells
    More than fulfilled their prophecy.
                                        One great eve,
    Fair Alice, leaning from her casement, saw
    Another Watch, and mightier than the first,
    Billowing past the newly painted doors
    Of Whittington Palace--so men called his house
    In Hart Street, fifteen yards from old Mark Lane,--
    thousand burganets and halberdiers;
    A thousand archers in their white silk coats,
    A thousand mounted men in ringing mail,
    A thousand sworded henchmen; then, his Guild,
    Advancing, on their splendid bannerols
    The Virgin, glorious in gold; and then,
    _Flos Mercatorum_, on his great stirring steed
    Whittington! On that night he made a feast
    For London and the King. His feasting hall
    Gleamed like the magic cave that Prester John
    Wrought out of one huge opal. East and West
    Lavished their wealth on that great Citizen
    Who, when the King from Agincourt returned
    Victorious, but with empty coffers, lent
    Three times the ransom of an Emperor
    To fill them--on the royal bond, and said
    When the King questioned him of how and whence,
    'I am the steward of your City, sire!
    There is a sea, and who shall drain it dry?'

      Over the roasted swans and peacock pies,
    The minstrels in the great black gallery tuned
    All hearts to mirth, until it seemed their cups
    Were brimmed with dawn and sunset, and they drank
    The wine of gods. Lord of a hundred ships,
    Under the feet of England, Whittington flung
    The purple of the seas. And when the Queen,
    Catharine, wondered at the costly woods
    That burned upon his hearth, the Marchaunt rose,
    He drew the great sealed parchments from his breast,
    The bonds the King had given him on his loans,
    Loans that might drain the Mediterranean dry.
    'They call us hucksters, madam, we that love
    Our City,' and, into the red-hot heart of the fire,
    He tossed the bonds of sixty thousand pounds.
    'The fire burns low,' said Richard Whittington.
    Then, overhead, the minstrels plucked their strings;
    And, over the clash of wine-cups, rose a song
    That made the old timbers of their feasting-hall
    Shake, as a galleon shakes in a gale of wind,
    When she rolls glorying through the Ocean-sea:--

    Marchaunt Adventurers, O, what shall it profit you
      Thus to seek your kingdom in the dream-destroying sun?
    Ask us why the hawthorn brightens on the sky-line:
      Even so our sails break out when Spring is well begun!
    _Flos Mercatorum!_ Blossom wide, ye sail of Englande,
      Hasten ye the kingdom, now the bitter days are done!
    Ay, for we be members, one of another,
      'Each for all and all for each,' quoth Richard Whittington!

    _Chorus:_--Marchaunt Adventurers,
                     Marchaunt Adventurers,
      Marchaunt Adventurers, the Spring is well begun!
    Break, break out on every sea, O, fair white sails of Englande!
      'Each for all, and all for each,' quoth Richard Whittington.

    Marchaunt Adventurers, O what 'ull ye bring home again?
      Woonders and works and the thunder of the sea!
    Whom will ye traffic with? The King of the sunset!--
      What shall be your pilot, then?--A wind from Galilee!

    --Nay, but ye be marchaunts, will ye come back empty-handed?--
      Ay, we be marchaunts, though our gain we ne'er shall see!
    Cast we now our bread upon the waste wild waters;
      After many days it shall return with usury.

    _Chorus:_--Marchaunt Adventurers,
                      Marchaunt Adventurers,
      What shall be your profit in the mighty days to be?
    Englande! Englande! Englande! Englande!
      Glory everlasting and the lordship of the sea.

    What need to tell you, sirs, how Whittington
    Remembered? Night and morning, as he knelt
    In those old days, O, like two children still,
    Whittington and his Alice bowed their heads
    Together, praying.
                        From such simple hearts,
    O never doubt it, though the whole world doubt
    The God that made it, came the steadfast strength
    Of England, all that once was her strong soul,
    The soul that laughed and shook away defeat
    As her strong cliffs hurl back the streaming seas.
    Sirs, in his old age Whittington returned,
    And stood with Alice, by the silent tomb
    In little Pauntley church.
                               There, to his Arms,
    The Gules and Azure, and the Lion's Head
    So proudly blazoned on the painted panes;
    (O, sirs, the simple wistfulness of it
    Might move hard hearts to laughter, but I think
    Tears tremble through it, for the Mermaid Inn)
    He added his new crest, the hard-won sign
    And lowly prize of his own industry,
    _The Honey-bee_. And, far away, the bells
    Peal softly from the pure white City of God:--
                      _Ut fragrans nardus
                      Fama fuit iste Ricardus._
    With folded hands he waits the Judgment now.
    Slowly our dark bells toll across the world,
    For him who waits the reckoning, his accompt
    Secure, his conscience clear, his ledger spread
    A _Liber Albus_ flooded with pure light.

              _Flos Mercatorum,
              Fundator presbyterorum_,...

    Slowly the dark bells toll for him who asks
    No more of men, but that they may sometimes
    Pray for the souls of Richard Whittington,
    Alice, his wife, and (as themselves of old
    Had prayed) the father and mother of each of them.
    Slowly the great notes fall and float away:--

              _Omnibus exemplum
              Barathrum vincendo morosum
              Condidit hoc templum ...
              Pauperibus pater ...
              Finiit ipse dies
              Sis sibi Christe quies. Amen._"


IX

RALEIGH

    Ben was our only guest that day. His tribe
    Had flown to their new shrine--the Apollo Room,
    To which, though they enscrolled his golden verse
    Above their doors like some great-fruited vine,
    Ben still preferred our _Mermaid_, and to smoke
    Alone in his old nook; perhaps to hear
    The voices of the dead,
    The voices of his old companions.
    Hovering near him,--Will and Kit and Rob.

    "Our Ocean-shepherd from the Main-deep sea,
    Raleigh," he muttered, as I brimmed his cup,
    "Last of the men that broke the fleets of Spain,
    'Twas not enough to cage him, sixteen years,
    Rotting his heart out in the Bloody Tower,
    But they must fling him forth in his old age
    To hunt for El Dorado. Then, mine host,
    Because his poor old ship _The Destiny_
    Smashes the Spaniard, but comes tottering home
    Without the Spanish gold, our gracious king,
    To please a catamite,
    Sends the old lion back to the Tower again.
    The friends of Spain will send him to the block
    This time. That male Salome, Buckingham,
    Is dancing for his head. Raleigh is doomed."
    A shadow stood in the doorway. We looked up;
    And there, but O, how changed, how worn and grey,
    Sir Walter Raleigh, like a hunted thing,
    Stared at us.

                        "Ben," he said, and glanced behind him.
    Ben took a step towards him.
                                    "O, my God,
    Ben," whispered the old man in a husky voice,
    Half timorous and half cunning, so unlike
    His old heroic self that one might weep
    To hear it, "Ben, I have given them all the slip!
    I may be followed. Can you hide me here
    Till it grows dark?"
    Ben drew him quickly in, and motioned me
    To lock the door. "Till it grows dark," he cried,
    "My God, that you should ask it!"
                                          "Do not think,
    Do not believe that I am quite disgraced,"
    The old man faltered, "for they'll say it, Ben;
    And when my boy grows up, they'll tell him, too,
    His father was a coward. I do cling
    To life for many reasons, not from fear
    Of death. No, Ben, I can disdain that still;
    But--there's my boy!"
                              Then all his face went blind.
    He dropt upon Ben's shoulder and sobbed outright,
    "They are trying to break my pride, to break my pride!"
    The window darkened, and I saw a face
    Blurring the panes. Ben gripped the old man's arm,
    And led him gently to a room within,
    Out of the way of guests.
                        "Your pride," he said,
    "That is the pride of England!"
                                    At that name--
    _England!_--
    As at a signal-gun, heard in the night
    Far out at sea, the weather and world-worn man,
    That once was Raleigh, lifted up his head.
    Old age and weakness, weariness and fear
    Fell from him like a cloak. He stood erect.
    His eager eyes, full of great sea-washed dawns,
    Burned for a moment with immortal youth,
    While tears blurred mine to see him.
                                         "You do think
    That England will remember? You do think it?"
    He asked with a great light upon his face.
    Ben bowed his head in silence.

       *   *   *   *

                                   "I have wronged
    My cause by this," said Raleigh. "Well they know it
    Who left this way for me. I have flung myself
    Like a blind moth into this deadly light
    Of freedom. Now, at the eleventh hour,
    Is it too late? I might return and--"
                                          "No!
    Not now!" Ben interrupted. "I'd have said
    Laugh at the headsman sixteen years ago,
    When England was awake. She will awake
    Again. But now, while our most gracious king,
    Who hates tobacco, dedicates his prayers
    To Buckingham--
    This is no land for men that, under God,
    Shattered the Fleet Invincible."
                                     A knock
    Startled us, at the outer door. "My friend
    Stukeley," said Raleigh, "if I know his hand.
    He has a ketch will carry me to France,
    Waiting at Tilbury."
                         I let him in,--
    A lean and stealthy fellow, Sir Lewis Stukeley,--
    liked him little. He thought much of his health,
    More of his money bags, and most of all
    On how to run with all men all at once
    For his own profit. At the _Mermaid Inn_
    Men disagreed in friendship and in truth;
    But he agreed with all men, and his life
    Was one soft quag of falsehood. Fugitives
    Must use false keys, I thought; and there was hope
    For Raleigh if such a man would walk one mile
    To serve him now. Yet my throat moved to see him
    Usurping, with one hand on Raleigh's arm,
    A kind of ownership. "_Lend me ten pounds_,"
    Were the first words he breathed in the old man's ear,
    And Raleigh slipped his purse into his hand.

       *   *   *   *

    Just over Bread Street hung the bruised white moon
    When they crept out. Sir Lewis Stukeley's watch-dog,
    A derelict bo'sun, with a mulberry face,
    Met them outside. "The coast quite clear, eh, Hart?"
    Said Stukeley. "Ah, that's good. Lead on, then, quick."
    And there, framed in the cruddle of moonlit clouds
    That ended the steep street, dark on its light,
    And standing on those glistening cobblestones
    Just where they turned to silver, Raleigh looked back
    Before he turned the corner. He stood there.
    A figure like foot-feathered Mercury,
    Tall, straight and splendid, waving his plumed hat
    To Ben, and taking his last look, I felt,
    Upon our _Mermaid Tavern_. As he paused,
    His long fantastic shadow swayed and swept
    Against our feet. Then, like a shadow, he passed.

    "It is not right," said Ben, "it is not right.
    Why did they give the old man so much grace?
    Witness and evidence are what they lack.
    Would you trust Stukeley--not to draw him out?
    Raleigh was always rash. A phrase or two
    Will turn their murderous axe into a sword
    Of righteousness--

                          Why, come to think of it,
    Blackfriar's Wharf, last night, I landed there,
    And--no, by God!--Raleigh is not himself,
    The tide will never serve beyond Gravesend.
    It is a trap! Come on! We'll follow them!
    Quick! To the river side!"--
                               We reached the wharf
    Only to see their wherry, a small black cloud
    Dwindling far down that running silver road.
    Ben touched my arm.
    "Look there," he said, pointing up-stream.
                                           The moon
    Glanced on a cluster of pikes, like silver thorns,
    Three hundred yards away, a little troop
    Of weaponed men, embarking hurriedly.
    Their great black wherry clumsily swung about,
    Then, with twelve oars for legs, came striding down,
    An armoured beetle on the glittering trail
    Of some small victim.
                                Just below our wharf
    A little dinghy waddled.
    Ben cut the painter, and without one word
    Drew her up crackling thro' the lapping water,
    Motioned me to the tiller, thrust her off,
    And, pulling with one oar, backing with the other,
    Swirled her round and down, hard on the track
    Of Raleigh. Ben was an old man now but tough,
    O tough as a buccaneer. We distanced them.
    His oar blades drove the silver boiling back.
    By Broken Wharf the beetle was a speck.
    It dwindled by Queen Hythe and the Three Cranes.
    By Bellyn's Gate we had left it, out of sight.
    By Custom House and Galley Keye we shot
    Thro' silver all the way, without one glimpse
    Of Raleigh. Then a dreadful shadow fell
    And over us the Tower of London rose
    Like ebony; and, on the glittering reach
    Beyond it, I could see the small black cloud
    That carried the great old seaman slowly down
    Between the dark shores whence in happier years
    The throng had cheered his golden galleons out,
    And watched his proud sails filling for Cathay.
    There, as through lead, we dragged by Traitor's Gate,
    There, in the darkness, under the Bloody Tower,
    There, on the very verge of victory,
    Ben gasped and dropped his oars.
    "Take one and row," he said, "my arms are numbed.
    We'll overtake him yet!" I clambered past him,
    And took the bow oar.

                             Once, as the pace flagged,
    Over his shoulder he turned his great scarred face
    And snarled, with a trickle of blood on his coarse lips,
    "Hard!"--
    And blood and fire ran through my veins again,
    For half a minute more.

                            Yet we fell back.
    Our course was crooked now. And suddenly
    A grim black speck began to grow behind us,
    Grow like the threat of death upon old age.
    Then, thickening, blackening, sharpening, foaming, swept
    Up the bright line of bubbles in our wake,
    That armoured wherry, with its long twelve oars
    All well together now.

                           "Too late," gasped Ben,
    His ash-grey face uplifted to the moon,
    One quivering hand upon the thwart behind him,
    A moment. Then he bowed over his knees
    Coughing. "But we'll delay them. We'll be drunk,
    And hold the catch-polls up!"

                                  We drifted down
    Before them, broadside on. They sheered aside.
    Then, feigning a clumsy stroke, Ben drove our craft
    As they drew level, right in among their blades.
    There was a shout, an oath. They thrust us off;
    And then we swung our nose against their bows
    And pulled them round with every well-meant stroke.
    A full half minute, ere they won quite free,
    Cursing us for a pair of drunken fools.

    We drifted down behind them.

                                  "There's no doubt,"
    Said Ben, "the headsman waits behind all this
    For Raleigh. This is a play to cheat the soul
    Of England, teach the people to applaud
    The red fifth act."
    Without another word we drifted down
    For centuries it seemed, until we came
    To Greenwich.
    Then up the long white burnished reach there crept
    Like little sooty clouds the two black boats
    To meet us.

                  "He is in the trap," said Ben,
    "And does not know it yet. See, where he sits
    By Stukeley as by a friend."

                                 Long after this,
    We heard how Raleigh, simply as a child,
    Seeing the tide would never serve him now,
    And they must turn, had taken from his neck
    Some trinkets that he wore. "Keep them," he said
    To Stukeley, "in remembrance of this night."

    He had no doubts of Stukeley when he saw
    The wherry close beside them. He but wrapped
    His cloak a little closer round his face.
    Our boat rocked in their wash when Stukeley dropped
    The mask. We saw him give the sign, and heard
    His high-pitched quavering voice--"IN THE KING'S NAME!"
    Raleigh rose to his feet. "I am under arrest?"
    He said, like a dazed man.

                                 And Stukeley laughed.
    Then, as he bore himself to the grim end,
    All doubt being over, the old sea-king stood
    Among those glittering points, a king indeed.
    The black boats rocked. We heard his level voice,
    "_Sir Lewis, these actions never will turn out
    To your good credit._" Across the moonlit Thames
    It rang contemptuously, cold as cold steel,
    And passionless as the judgment that ends all.

       *   *   *   *

    Some three months later, Raleigh's widow came
    To lodge a se'nnight at the Mermaid Inn.
    His house in Bread Street was no more her own,
    But in the hands of Stukeley, who had reaped
    A pretty harvest ...
    She kept close to her room, and that same night,
    Being ill and with some fever, sent her maid
    To fetch the apothecary from Friday Street,
    Old "Galen" as the Mermaid christened him.
    At that same moment, as the maid went out,
    Stukeley came in. He met her at the door;
    And, chucking her under the chin, gave her a letter.
    "Take this up to your mistress. It concerns
    Her property," he said. "Say that I wait,
    And would be glad to speak with her."
                                             The wench
    Looked pertly in his face, and tripped upstairs.
    I scarce could trust my hands.
                                   "Sir Lewis," I said,
    "This is no time to trouble her. She is ill."
    "Let her decide," he answered, with a sneer.
    Before I found another word to say
    The maid tripped down again. I scarce believed
    My senses, when she beckoned him up the stair.
    Shaking from head to foot, I blocked the way.
    "Property!" Could the crux of mine and thine
    Bring widow and murderer into one small room?
    "Sir Lewis," I said, "she is ill. It is not right!
    She never would consent."
                                He sneered again,
    "You are her doctor? Out of the way, old fool!
    She has decided!"
                        "Go," I said to the maid,
    "Fetch the apothecary. Let it rest
    With him!"
               She tossed her head. Her quick eyes glanced,
    Showing the white, like the eyes of a vicious mare.
    She laughed at Stukeley, loitered, then obeyed.

    And so we waited, till the wench returned,
    With Galen at her heels. His wholesome face,
    Russet and wrinkled like an apple, peered
    Shrewdly at Stukeley, twinkled once at me,
    And passed in silence, leaving a whiff of herbs
    Behind him on the stair.
                                 Five minutes later,
    To my amazement, that same wholesome face
    Leaned from the lighted door above, and called
    "Sir Lewis Stukeley!"
                           Sir Judas hastened up.
    The apothecary followed him within.
    The door shut. I was left there in the dark
    Bewildered; for my heart was hot with thoughts
    Of those last months. Our Summer's Nightingale,
    Our Ocean-Shepherd from the Main-deep Sea,
    The Founder of our Mermaid Fellowship,
    Was this his guerdon--at the Mermaid Inn?
    Was this that maid-of-honour whose romance
    With Raleigh, once, had been a kingdom's talk?
    Could Bess Throckmorton slight his memory thus?
    "It is not right," I said, "it is not right.
    She wrongs him deeply."
                              I leaned against the porch
    Staring into the night. A ghostly ray
    Above me, from her window, bridged the street,
    And rested on the goldsmith's painted sign
    Opposite.
              I could hear the muffled voice
    Of Stukeley overhead, persuasive, bland;
    And then, her own, cooing, soft as a dove
    Calling her mate from Eden cedar-boughs,
    Flowed on and on; and then--all my flesh crept
    At something worse than either, a long space
    Of silence that stretched threatening and cold,
    Cold as a dagger-point pricking the skin
    Over my heart.
                       Then came a stifled cry,
    A crashing door, a footstep on the stair
    Blundering like a drunkard's, heavily down;
    And with his gasping face one tragic mask
    Of horror,--may God help me to forget
    Some day the frozen awful eyes of one
    Who, fearing neither hell nor heaven, has met
    That ultimate weapon of the gods, the face
    And serpent-tresses that turn flesh to stone--
    Stukeley stumbled, groping his way out,
    Blindly, past me, into the sheltering night.

       *   *   *   *

    It was the last night of another year
    Before I understood what punishment
    Had overtaken Stukeley. Ben, and Brome--
    Ben's ancient servant, but turned poet now--
    Sat by the fire with the old apothecary
    To see the New Year in.
                            The starry night
    Had drawn me to the door. Could it be true
    That our poor earth no longer was the hub
    Of those white wheeling orbs? I scarce believed
    The strange new dreams; but I had seen the veils
    Rent from vast oceans and huge continents,
    Till what was once our comfortable fire,
    Our cosy tavern, and our earthly home
    With heaven beyond the next turn in the road,
    All the resplendent fabric of our world
    Shrank to a glow-worm, lighting up one leaf
    In one small forest, in one little land,
    Among those wild infinitudes of God.
    A tattered wastrel wandered down the street,
    Clad in a seaman's jersey, staring hard
    At every sign. Beneath our own, the light
    Fell on his red carbuncled face. I knew him--
    The bo'sun, Hart.
                        He pointed to our sign
    And leered at me. "That's her," he said, "no doubt,
    The sea-witch with the shiny mackerel tail
    Swishing in wine. That's what Sir Lewis meant.
    He called it blood. Blood is his craze, you see.
    This is the Mermaid Tavern, sir, no doubt?"
    I nodded. "Ah, I thought as much," he said.
    "Well--happen this is worth a cup of ale."
    He thrust his hand under his jersey and lugged
    A greasy letter out. It was inscribed
    THE APOTHECARY AT THE MERMAID TAVERN.

    I led him in. "I knew it, sir," he said,
    While Galen broke the seal. "Soon as I saw
    That sweet young naked wench curling her tail
    In those red waves.--The old man called it blood.
    Blood is his craze, you see.--But you can tell
    'Tis wine, sir, by the foam. Malmsey, no doubt.
    And that sweet wench to make you smack your lips
    Like oysters, with her slippery tail and all!
    Why, sir, no doubt, this was the Mermaid Inn."

    "But this," said Galen, lifting his grave face
    To Ben, "this letter is from all that's left
    Of Stukeley. The good host, there, thinks I wronged
    Your Ocean-shepherd's memory. From this letter,
    I think I helped to avenge him. Do not wrong
    His widow, even in thought. She loved him dearly.
    You know she keeps his poor grey severed head
    Embalmed; and so will keep it till she dies;
    Weeps over it alone. I have heard such things
    In wild Italian tales. But _this_ was true.
    Had I refused to let her speak with Stukeley
    I feared she would go mad. This letter proves
    That I--and she perhaps--were instruments,
    Of some more terrible chirurgery
    Than either knew."

                       "Ah, when I saw your sign,"
    The bo'sun interjected, "I'd no doubt
    That letter was well worth a cup of ale."

      "Go--paint your bows with hell-fire somewhere else,
    Not at this inn," said Ben, tossing the rogue
    A good French crown. "Pickle yourself in hell."
    And Hart lurched out into the night again,
    Muttering "Thank you, sirs. 'Twas worth all that.
    No doubt at all."

                         "There are some men," said Galen,
    Spreading the letter out on his plump knees,
    "Will heap up wrong on wrong; and, at the last,
    Wonder because the world will not forget
    Just when it suits them, cancel all they owe,
    And, like a mother, hold its arms out wide
    At their first cry. And, sirs, I do believe
    That Stukeley, on that night, had some such wish
    To reconcile himself. What else had passed
    Between the widow and himself I know not;
    But she had lured him on until he thought
    That words and smiles, perhaps a tear or two,
    Might make the widow take the murderer's hand
    In friendship, since it might advantage both.
    Indeed, he came prepared for even more.
    Villains are always fools. A wicked act,
    What is it but a false move in the game,
    A blind man's blunder, a deaf man's reply,
    The wrong drug taken in the dead of night?
    I always pity villains.
                           I mistook
    The avenger for the victim. There she lay
    Panting, that night, her eyes like summer stars
    Her pale gold hair upon the pillows tossed
    Dishevelled, while the fever in her face
    Brought back the lost wild roses of her youth
    For half an hour. Against a breast as pure
    And smooth as any maid's, her soft arms pressed
    A bundle wrapped in a white embroidered cloth.
    She crooned over it as a mother croons
    Over her suckling child. I stood beside her.
    --That was her wish, and mine, while Stukeley stayed.--
    And, over against me, on the other side,
    Stood Stukeley, gnawing his nether lip to find
    She could not, or she would not, speak one word
    In answer to his letter.

                           'Lady Raleigh,
    You wrong me, and you wrong yourself,' he cried,
    'To play like a green girl when great affairs
    Are laid before you. Let me speak with you
    Alone.'

           'But I am all alone,' she said,
    'Far more alone than I have ever been
    In all my life before. This is my doctor.
    He must not leave me.'

                              Then she lured him on,
    Played on his brain as a musician plays
    Upon the lute.
                    'Forgive me, dear Sir Lewis,
    If I am grown too gay for widowhood.
    But I have pondered for a long, long time
    On all these matters. I know the world was right;
    And Spain was right, Sir Lewis. Yes, and you,
    You too, were right; and my poor husband wrong.
    You see I knew his mind so very well.
    I knew his every gesture, every smile.
    I lived with him. I think I died with him.
    It is a strange thing, marriage. For my soul
    (As if myself were present in this flesh)
    Beside him, slept in his grey prison-cell
    On that last dreadful dawn. I heard the throng
    Murmuring round the scaffold far away;
    And, with the smell of sawdust in my nostrils,
    I woke, bewildered as himself, to see
    That tall black-cassocked figure by his bed.
    I heard the words that made him understand:
    _The Body of our Lord--take and eat this!_
    I rolled the small sour flakes beneath my tongue
    With him. I caught, with him, the gleam of tears,
    Far off, on some strange face of sickly dread.
    _The Blood_--and the cold cup was in my hand,
    Cold as an axe-heft washed with waterish red.
    I heard his last poor cry to wife and child.--
    Could any that heard forget it?--_My true God,
    Hold you both in His arms, both in His arms._
    And then--that last poor wish, a thing to raise
    A smile in some. I have smiled at it myself
    A thousand times.
                          "_Give me my pipe_," he said,
    "_My old Winchester clay, with the long stem,
    And half an hour alone. The crowd can wait.
    They have not waited half so long as I._"
    And then, O then, I know what soft blue clouds,
    What wavering rings, fragrant ascending wreaths
    Melted his prison walls to a summer haze,
    Through which I think he saw the little port
    Of Budleigh Salterton, like a sea-bird's nest
    Among the Devon cliffs--the tarry quay
    Whence in his boyhood he had flung a line
    For bass or whiting-pollock. I remembered
    (Had he not told me, on some summer night,
    His arm about my neck, kissing my hair)
    He used to sit there, gazing out to sea;
    Fish, and for what? Not all for what he caught
    And handled; but for rainbow-coloured things,
    The water-drops that jewelled his thin line,
    Flotsam and jetsam of the sunset-clouds;
    While the green water, gurgling through the piles,
    Heaving and sinking, helped him to believe
    The fast-bound quay a galleon plunging out
    Superbly for Cathay. There would he sit
    Listening, a radiant boy, child of the sea,
    Listening to some old seaman's glowing tales,
    His grey eyes rich with pictures--

                                       Then he saw,
    And I with him, that gathering in the West,
    To break the Fleet Invincible. O, I heard
    The trumpets and the neighings and the drums.
    I watched the beacons on a hundred hills.
    I drank that wine of battle from _his_ cup,
    And gloried in it, lying against his heart.
    I sailed with him and saw the unknown worlds!
    The slender ivory towers of old Cathay
    Rose for us over lilac-coloured seas
    That crumbled a sky-blue foam on long shores
    Of shining sand, shores of so clear a glass
    They drew the sunset-clouds into their bosom
    And hung that City of Vision in mid-air
    Girdling it round, as with a moat of sky,
    Hopelessly beautiful. O, yet I heard,
    Heard from his blazoned poops the trumpeters
    Blowing proud calls, while overhead the flag
    Of England floated from white towers of sail--
    And yet, and yet, I knew that he was wrong,
    And soon he knew it, too.

                               I saw the cloud
    Of doubt assail him, in the Bloody Tower,
    When, being withheld from sailing the high seas
    For sixteen years, he spread a prouder sail,
    Took up his pen, and, walled about with stone,
    Began to write--his _History of the World_.
    And emperors came like Lazarus from the grave
    To wear his purple. And the night disgorged
    Its empires, till, O, like the swirl of dust
    Around their marching legions, that dim cloud
    Of doubt closed round him. Was there any man
    So sure of heart and brain as to record
    The simple truth of things himself had seen?
    Then who could plumb that night? The work broke off!
    He knew that he was wrong. I knew it, too!
    Once more that stately structure of his dreams
    Melted like mist. His eagles perished like clouds.
    Death wound a thin horn through the centuries.
    The grave resumed his forlorn emperors.
    His empires crumbled back to a little ash
    Knocked from his pipe.--
    He dropped his pen in homage to the truth.
    The truth? _O, eloquent, just and mighty Death!_

    Then, when he forged, out of one golden thought,
    A key to open his prison; when the King
    Released him for a tale of faërie gold
    Under the tropic palms; when those grey walls
    Melted before his passion; do you think
    The gold that lured the King was quite the same
    As that which Raleigh saw? You know the song:

         "Say to the King," quoth Raleigh,
           "I have a tale to tell him;
             Wealth beyond derision,
               Veils to lift from the sky,
         Seas to sail for England,
           And a little dream to sell him,
             Gold, the gold of a vision
               That angels cannot buy."

    Ah, no! For all the beauty and the pride,
    Raleigh was wrong; but not so wrong, I think,
    As those for whom his kingdoms oversea
    Meant only glittering dust. The fight he waged
    Was not with them. They never worsted him.

    It was _The Destiny_ that brought him home
    Without the Spanish gold.--O, he was wrong,
    But such a wrong, in Gloriana's day,
    Was more than right, was immortality.
    He had just half an hour to put all this
    Into his pipe and smoke it,--

                                   The red fire,
    The red heroic fire that filled his veins
    When the proud flag of England floated out
    Its challenge to the world--all gone to ash?
    What! Was the great red wine that Drake had quaffed
    Vinegar? He must fawn, haul down his flag,
    And count all nations nobler than his own,
    Tear out the lions from the painted shields
    That hung his poop, for fear that he offend
    The pride of Spain? Treason to sack the ships
    Of Spain? The wounds of slaughtered Englishmen
    Cried out--_there is no law beyond the line!_
    Treason to sweep the seas with Francis Drake?
    Treason to fight for England?
                                 If it were so,
    The times had changed and quickly. He had been
    A schoolboy in the morning of the world
    Playing with wooden swords and winning crowns
    Of tinsel; but his comrades had outgrown
    Their morning-game, and gathered round to mock
    His battles in the sunset. Yet he knew
    That all his life had passed in that brief day;
    And he was old, too old to understand
    The smile upon the face of Buckingham,
    The smile on Cobham's face, at that great word
    _England_!
              He knew the solid earth was changed
    To something less than dust among the stars--
    And, O, be sure he knew that he was wrong,
    That gleams would come,
    Gleams of a happier world for younger men,
    That Commonwealth, far off. This was a time
    Of sadder things, destruction of the old
    Before the new was born. At least he knew
    It was his own way that had brought the world
    Thus far, England thus far! How could he change,
    Who had loved England as a man might love
    His mistress, change from year to fickle year?
    For the new years would change, even as the old.
    No--he was wedded to that old first love,
    Crude flesh and blood, and coarse as meat and drink,
    The woman--England; no fine angel-isle,
    Ruled by that male Salome--Buckingham!
    Better the axe than to live on and wage
    These new and silent and more deadly wars
    That play at friendship with our enemies.
    Such times are evil. Not of their own desire
    They lead to good, blind agents of that Hand
    Which now had hewed him down, down to his knees,
    But in a prouder battle than men knew.

    His pipe was out, the guard was at the door.
    Raleigh was not a god. But, when he climbed
    The scaffold, I believe he looked a man.
    And when the axe fell, I believe that God
    Set on his shoulders that immortal head
    Which he desired on earth.

                                  O, he was wrong!
    But when that axe fell, not one shout was raised.
    That mighty throng around that crimson block
    Stood silent--like the hushed black cloud that holds
    The thunder. You might hear the headsman's breath.
    Stillness like that is dangerous, being charged,
    Sometimes, with thought, Sir Lewis! England sleeps!
    What if, one day, the Stewart should be called
    To know that England wakes? What if a shout
    Should thunder-strike Whitehall, and the dogs lift
    Their heads along the fringes of the crowd
    To catch a certain savour that I know,
    The smell of blood and sawdust?--

                                           Ah, Sir Lewis,
    'Tis hard to find one little seed of right
    Among so many wrongs. Raleigh was wrong,
    And yet--it was because he loved his country
    Next to himself, Sir Lewis, by your leave,
    His country butchered him. You did not know
    That I was only third in his affections?
    The night I told him--we were parting then--
    I had begged the last disposal of his body,
    Did he not say, with O, so gentle a smile,
    "_Thou hadst not always the disposal of it
    In life, dear Bess. 'Tis well it should be thine
    In death!_"'

                 'The jest was bitter at such an hour,
    And somewhat coarse in grain,' Stukeley replied.
    'Indeed I thought him kinder.'

                                  'Kinder,' she said,
    Laughing bitterly.

                      Stukeley looked at her.
    She whispered something, and his lewd old eyes
    Fastened upon her own. He knelt by her.
    'Perhaps,' he said, 'your woman's wit has found
    A better way to solve this bitter business.'
    Her head moved on the pillow with little tossings.
    He touched her hand. It leapt quickly away.
    She hugged that strange white bundle to her breast,
    And writhed back, smiling at him, across the bed.

    'Ah, Bess,' he whispered huskily, pressing his lips
    To that warm hollow where her head had lain,
    'There is one way to close the long dispute,
    Keep the estates unbroken in your hands
    And stop all slanderous tongues, one happy way.
    We have some years to live; and why alone?'
    'Alone?' she sighed. 'My husband thought of that.
    He wrote a letter to me long ago,
    When he was first condemned. He said--he said--
    Now let me think--what was it that he said?--
    I had it all by heart. "_Beseech you, Bess,
    Hide not yourself for many days_", he said.'
    'True wisdom that,' quoth Stukeley, 'for the love
    That seeks to chain the living to the dead
    Is but self-love at best!'

                             'And yet,' she said,
    'How his poor heart was torn between two cares,
    Love of himself and care for me, as thus:

    _Love God! Begin to repose yourself on Him!
    Therein you shall find true and lasting riches;
    But all the rest is nothing. When you have tired
    Your thoughts on earthly things, when you have travelled
    Through all the glittering pomps of this proud world
    You shall sit down by Sorrow in the end.
    Begin betimes, and teach your little son
    To serve and fear God also.
    Then God will be a husband unto you,
    And unto him a father; nor can Death
    Bereave you any more. When I am gone,
    No doubt you shall be sought unto by many
    For the world thinks that I was very rich.
    No greater misery can befall you, Bess,
    Than to become a prey, and, afterwards,
    To be despised.'_

                     'Human enough,' said Stukeley,
    'And yet--self-love, self-love!'

                                 'Ah no,' quoth she,
    'You have not heard the end: _God knows, I speak it
    Not to dissuade you_--not to dissuade you, mark--
    _From marriage. That will be the best for you,
    Both in respect of God and of the world._
    Was _that_ self-love, Sir Lewis? Ah, not all.
    And thus he ended: _For his father's sake
    That chose and loved you in his happiest times,
    Remember your poor child! The Everlasting,
    Infinite, powerful, and inscrutable God,
    Keep you and yours, have mercy upon me,
    And teach me to forgive my false accusers_--
    Wrong, even in death, you see. Then--_My true wife,
    Farewell!
    Bless my poor boy! Pray for me! My true God,
    Hold you both in His arms, both in His arms!_
    I know that he was wrong. You did not know,
    Sir Lewis, that he had left me a little child.
    Come closer. You shall see its orphaned face,
    The sad, sad relict of a man that loved
    His country--all that's left to me. Come, look!'
    She beckoned Stukeley nearer. He bent down
    Curiously. Her feverish fingers drew

    The white wrap from the bundle in her arms,
    And, with a smile that would make angels weep,
    She showed him, pressed against her naked breast,
    Terrible as Medusa, the grey flesh
    And shrivelled face, embalmed, the thing that dropped
    Into the headsman's basket, months agone,--
    The head of Raleigh.
                             Half her body lay
    Bare, while she held that grey babe to her heart;
    But Judas hid his face....
    'Living,' she said, 'he was not always mine;
    But--dead--I shall not wean him'--
                                       Then, I too
    Covered my face--I cannot tell you more.
    There was a dreadful silence in that room,
    Silence that, as I know, shattered the brain
    Of Stukeley.--When I dared to raise my head
    Beneath that silent thunder of our God,
    The man had gone--
                          This is his letter, sirs,
    Written from Lundy Island: "_For God's love,
    Tell them it is a cruel thing to say
    That I drink blood. I have no secret sin.
    A thousand pound is not so great a sum;
    And that is all they paid me, every penny.
    Salt water, that is all the drink I taste
    On this rough island. Somebody has taught
    The sea-gulls how to wail around my hut
    All night, like lost souls. And there is a face,
    A dead man's face that laughs in every storm,
    And sleeps in every pool along the coast.
    I thought it was my own, once. But I know
    These actions never, never, on God's earth,
    Will turn out to their credit, who believe
    That I drink blood._"
                         He crumpled up the letter
    And tossed it into the fire.
                                 "Galen," said Ben,
    "I think you are right--that one should pity villains."

       *   *   *   *

    The clock struck twelve. The bells began to peal.
    We drank a cup of sack to the New Year.
    "New songs, new voices, all as fresh as may,"
    Said Ben to Brome, "but I shall never live
    To hear them."

                    All was not so well, indeed,
    With Ben, as hitherto. Age had come upon him.
    He dragged one foot as in paralysis.
    The critics bayed against the old lion, now,
    And called him arrogant. "My brain," he said,
    "Is yet unhurt although, set round with pain,
    It cannot long hold out." He never stooped,
    Never once pandered to that brainless hour.
    His coat was thread-bare. Weeks had passed of late
    Without his voice resounding in our inn.

    "The statues are defiled, the gods dethroned,
    The Ionian movement reigns, not the free soul.
    And, as for me, I have lived too long," he said.
    "Well--I can weave the old threnodies anew."
    And, filling his cup, he murmured, soft and low,
    A new song, breaking on an ancient shore:


    I

    Marlowe is dead, and Greene is in his grave,
      And sweet Will Shakespeare long ago is gone!
    Our Ocean-shepherd sleeps beneath the wave;
    Robin is dead, and Marlowe in his grave.
    Why should I stay to chant an idle stave,
      And in my Mermaid Tavern drink alone?
    For Kit is dead and Greene is in his grave,
      And sweet Will Shakespeare long ago is gone.


    II

    Where is the singer of the Faërie Queen?
      Where are the lyric lips of Astrophel?
    Long, long ago, their quiet graves were green;
    Ay, and the grave, too, of their Faërie Queen!
    And yet their faces, hovering here unseen,
      Call me to taste their new-found oenomel;
    To sup with him who sang the Faërie Queen;
      To drink with him whose name was Astrophel.


    III

    I drink to that great Inn beyond the grave!
      --If there be none, the gods have done us wrong.--
    Ere long I hope to chant a better stave,
    In some great Mermaid Inn beyond the grave;
    And quaff the best of earth that heaven can save,
      Red wine like blood, deep love of friends and song.
    I drink to that great Inn beyond the grave;
      And hope to greet my golden lads ere long.

    He raised his cup and drank in silence. Brome
    Drank with him, too. The bells had ceased to peal.
    Galen shook hands, and bade us all good-night.
    Then Brome, a little wistfully, I thought,
    Looked at his old-time master, and prepared
    To follow.
                  "Good-night--Ben," he said, a pause
    Before he spoke the name. "Good-night! Good-night!
    My dear old Brome," said Ben.
                                      And, at the door,
    Brome whispered to me, "He is lonely now.
    There are not many left of his old friends.
    We all go out--like this--into the night.
    But what a fleet of stars!" he said, and shook
    My hand, and smiled, and pointed to the sky.
    And, when I looked into the room again,
    The lights were very dim, and I believed
    That Ben had fallen asleep. His great grey head
    Was bowed across the table, on his arms.
    Then, all at once, I knew that he was weeping;
    And like a shadow I crept back again,
    And stole into the night.
                                There as I stood
    Under the painted sign, I could have vowed
    That I, too, heard the voices of the dead,
    The voices of his old companions,
    Gathering round him in that lonely room,
    Till all the timbers of the Mermaid Inn
    Trembled above me with their ghostly song:


    I

    Say to the King, quoth Raleigh
      I have a tale to tell him,
        Wealth beyond derision,
          Veils to lift from the sky,
    Seas to sail for England
      And a little dream to sell him,--
        Gold, the gold of a vision,
          That angels cannot buy.


    II

    Fair thro' the walls of his dungeon,
      --What were the stones but a shadow?--
        Streamed the light of the rapture,
          The lure that he followed of old,
    The dream of his old companions,
      The vision of El Dorado,
        The fleet that they never could capture,
          The City of Sunset-gold.


    III

    Yet did they sail the seas
      And, dazed with exceeding wonder,
        Straight through the sunset-glory
          Plunge into the dawn:
    Leaving their home behind them,
      By a road of splendour and thunder,
        They came to their home in amazement
          Simply by sailing on.




NEW POEMS




A WATCHWORD OF THE FLEET

     [_For purposes of recognition at night a small squadron of
     Elizabethan ships, crossing the Atlantic, adopted as a
     watchword the sentence: Before the world--was God._]


    They diced with Death. Their big sea-boots
      Were greased with blood. They swept the seas
    For England; and--we reap the fruits
      Of their heroic deviltries!
    Our creed is in the cold machine,
      The inhuman devildoms of brain,
      The bolt that splits the midnight main,
    Loosed at a lever's touch; the lean
      Torpedo; "Twenty Miles of Power";
    The steel-clad Dreadnoughts' dark array!
      Yet ... we that keep the conning tower
    Are not so strong as they
      Whose watchword we disdain.

    They laughed at odds for England's sake!
      We count, yet cast our strength away.
    One Admiral with the soul of Drake
      Would break the fleets of hell to-day!
    Give us the splendid heavens of youth,
      Give us the banners of deathless flame,
      The ringing watchwords of their fame,
    The faith, the hope, the simple truth!
      Then shall the Deep indeed be swayed
    Through all its boundless breadth and length,
      Nor this proud England lean dismayed
    On twenty miles of strength,
      Or shrink from aught but shame.

    Pull out by night, O leave the shore
      And lighted streets of Plymouth town,
    Pull out into the Deep once more!
      There, in the night of their renown,
    The same great waters roll their gloom
      Around our midget period;
      And the huge decks that Raleigh trod
    Over our petty darkness loom!
      Along the line the cry is passed
    From all their heaven-illumined spars,
      Clear as a bell, from mast to mast,
    It rings against the stars:
      _Before the world--was God._




NEW WARS FOR OLD

     "_Peace with its luxury is the corrupter of Nations._"

     _Any militarist Journal._


    I

    Peace! When have we prayed for peace?
          Over us burns a star
    Bright, beautiful, red for strife!
    Yours are only the drum and the fife
    And the golden braid and the surface of life!
          Ours is the white-hot war!


    II

    Peace? When have we prayed for peace?
          Ours are the weapons of men!
    Time changes the face of the world!
    Therefore your ancient flags are furled,
    And ours are the unseen legions hurled
          Up to the heights again!


    III

    Peace? When have we prayed for peace?
          Is there no wrong to right?
    Wrong crying to God on high
    Here where the weak and the helpless die,
    And the homeless hordes of the city go by,
          The ranks are rallied to-night!


    IV

    Peace? When have we prayed for peace?
          Are ye so dazed with words?
    Earth, heaven, shall pass away
    Ere for your passionless peace we pray!
    Are ye deaf to the trumpets that call us to-day,
          Blind to the blazing swords?




THE PRAYER FOR PEACE

     "_Unless public opinion can rise to the height of discussing
     the substitution of law for force as a great world-movement,
     the American arbitration proposals cannot be carried out._"

                                        _Sir Edward Grey._




    I

    Dare we--though our hope deferred
      Left us faithless long ago--
    Dare we let our hearts be stirred,
      Lift them to the light and _know_,
    Cast away our cynic shields,
    Break the sword that Mockery wields,
    _Know_ that Truth indeed prevails,
    And that Justice holds the scales?
              Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    II

    Dare we know that this great hour,
      Dawning on thy long renown,
    Marks the purpose of thy power,
      Crowns thee with a mightier crown,
    Know that to this purpose climb
    All the blood-red wars of Time?
    If indeed thou _hast_ a goal
    Beaconing to thy warrior soul,
              Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    III

    Dare we know what every age
    Writes with an unerring hand,
    Read the midnight's moving page,
    Read the stars and understand,--
    Out of Chaos ye shall draw
    Linked harmonies of Law,
    Till around the Eternal Sun
    All your peoples move in one?
                Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    IV

    Dare we know that wearied eyes
      Dimmed with dust of every day
    _Can_, once more, desire the skies
    And the glorious upward way?
    Dare we, if the Truth should still
    Vex with doubt our alien will,
    Take it to our Maker's throne,
    Let Him speak with us alone?
                Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    V

    _Dare we cast our pride away?
      Dare we tread where Lincoln trod?
    All the Future, by this day,
      Waits to judge us and our God!
    Set the struggling peoples free!
    Crown with Law their Liberty!
    Proud with an immortal pride,
    Kneel we at our Sister's side!
                Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!_




THE SWORD OF ENGLAND

     (_Written during a European war crisis_)


    Not as one muttering in a spell-bound sleep
      Shall England speak the word;
    Not idly bid the embattled lightnings leap,
      Nor lightly draw the sword!

    Let statesmen grope by night in a blind dream,
      The cold clear morning star
    Should like a trophy in her helmet gleam
      When England sweeps to war!

    Not like a derelict, drunk with surf and spray,
      And drifting down to doom;
    But like the Sun-god calling up the day
      Should England rend that gloom.

    Not as in trance, at some hypnotic call,
      Nor with a doubtful cry;
    But a clear faith, like a banner above us all,
      Rolling from sky to sky.

    She sheds no blood to that vain god of strife
      Whom striplings call "renown";
    She knows that only they who reverence life
      Can nobly lay it down;

    And these will ride from child and home and love,
      Through death and hell that day;
    But O, her faith, her flag, must burn above,
      Her soul must lead the way!




THE DAWN OF PEACE


    Yes--"on our brows we feel the breath
        Of dawn," though in the night we wait!
    An arrow is in the heart of Death,
        A God is at the doors of Fate!
    The spirit that moved upon the Deep
        Is moving through the minds of men:
    The nations feel it in their sleep,
        A change has touched their dreams again.

    Voices, confused, and faint, arise,
        Troubling their hearts from East and West.
    A doubtful light is in their skies,
        A gleam that will not let them rest:
    The dawn, the dawn is on the wing,
        The stir of change on every side,
    Unsignalled as the approach of Spring,
        Invincible as the hawthorn-tide.

    Have ye not heard it, far and nigh,
        The voice of France across the dark,
    And all the Atlantic with one cry
        Beating the shores of Europe?--hark!
    Then--if ye will--uplift your word
        Of cynic wisdom! Once again
    Tell us He came to bring a sword,
        Tell us He lived and died in vain.

    Say that we dream! Our dreams have woven
        Truths that out-face the burning sun:
    The lightnings, that we dreamed, have cloven
        Time, space, and linked all lands in one!
    Dreams! But their swift celestial fingers
        Have knit the world with threads of steel,
    Till no remotest island lingers
        Beyond the world's one Commonweal.

    Tell us that custom, sloth, and fear
        Are strong, then name them "common-sense"!
    Tell us that greed rules everywhere,
        Then dub the lie "experience":
    Year after year, age after age,
        Has handed down, thro' fool and child,
    For earth's divinest heritage
        The dreams whereon old wisdom smiled.

    Dreams are they? But ye cannot stay them,
        Or thrust the dawn back for one hour!
    Truth, Love, and Justice, if ye slay them,
        Return with more than earthly power:
    Strive, if ye will, to seal the fountains
        That send the Spring thro' leaf and spray:
    Drive back the sun from the Eastern mountains,
        Then--bid this mightier movement stay.

    It is the Dawn of Peace! The nations
        From East to West have heard a cry,--
    "Through all earth's blood-red generations
        By hate and slaughter climbed thus high,
    Here--on this height--still to aspire,
        One only path remains untrod,
    One path of love and peace climbs higher!
        Make straight that highway for our God."




THE BRINGERS OF GOOD NEWS


    Like fallen stars the watch-fires gleamed
        Along our menaced age that night!
    Our bivouacked century tossed and dreamed
        Of battle with the approaching light.

    Rumors of change, a sea-like roar,
        Shook the firm earth with doubt and dread:
    The clouds, in rushing legions bore
        Their tattered eagles overhead.

    I saw the muffled sentries rest
        On the dark hills of Time. I saw
    Around them march from East to West
        The stars of the unresting law.

    I knew that in their mighty course
        They brought the dawn, they brought the day;
    And that the unconquerable force
        Of the new years was on the way.

    I heard the feet of that great throng!
        I saw them shine, like hope, afar!
    Their shout, their shout was like a song,
        And O, 'twas not a song of war!

    Yet, as the whole world with their tramp
        Quivered, a signal-lightning spoke,
    A bugle warned our darkling camp,
        And, like a thunder-cloud, it woke.

    Our searchlights raked the world's wide ends.
        O'er the dark hills a grey light crept.
    Down, through the light, that host of friends
        We took for foemen, triumphing swept.

    The old century could not hear their cry,
        How should it hear the song they sang?
    _We bring good news!_ It pierced the sky!
        _We bring good news!_ The welkin rang.

    One shout of triumph and of faith;
        And then--our shattering cannon roared!
    But, over the reeking ranks of death,
        The song rose like a single sword.

    _We bring good news!_ Red flared the guns!
        _We bring good news!_ The sabres flashed!
    And the dark age with its own sons
        In blind and furious battle clashed.

    A swift, a terrible bugle pealed.
      The sulphurous clouds were rolled away.
    Embraced, embraced, on that red field,
      The wounded and the dying lay.

    _We bring good news!_ Blood choked the word,
        --_We knew you not; so dark the night!--
    O father, was I worth your sword?
        O son, O herald of the light!_

    _We bring good news!_--The darkness fills
        Mine eyes!--Nay, the night ebbs away!
    And, over the everlasting hills,
        The great new dawn led on the day.




THE LONELY SHRINE

     (_A few months after the Milton Ter-centenary._)


    I

    The crowd has passed away,
        Faded the feast, and most forget!
    Master, we come with lowly hearts to pay
        Our deeper debt.


    II

    High they upheld the wine,
        And royally, royally drank to thee!
    Loud were their plaudits. Now the lonely shrine
        Accepts our knee.


    III

    All dark and silent now!
        Master, thy few are faithful still,
    And nightly hear thy brooks that warbling flow
        By Siloa's hill.




AT NOON

     (AFTER THE FRENCH OF VERLAINE)


    The sky is blue above the roof,
          So calm, so blue;
    One rustling bough above the roof
          Rocks, the noon through.

    The bell-tower in the sky, aloof,
          Tenderly rings!
    A bird upon the bough, aloof,
          Sorrows and sings.

    My God, my God, and life is here
          So simple and still!
    Far off, the murmuring town I hear
          At the wind's will....

    _What hast thou done, thou, weeping there?
          O quick, the truth!
    What hast thou done, thou, weeping there,
          With thy lost youth?_




TO A FRIEND OF BOYHOOD LOST AT SEA


    O warm blue sky and dazzling sea,
    Where have you hid my friend from me?
        The white-chalk coast, the leagues of surf
    Laugh to the May-light, now as then,
        And violets in the short sweet turf
    Make fragmentary heavens again,
        And sea-born wings of rustling snow
        Pass and re-pass as long ago.

    Old friend, do you remember yet
    The days when secretly we met
        In that old harbor years a-back,
    Where I admired your billowing walk,
        Or in that perilous fishing smack
    What tarry oaths perfumed your talk,
        The sails we set, the ropes we spliced,
        The raw potato that we sliced,

    For mackerel-bait--and how it shines
    Far down, at end of the taut lines!--
        And the great catch we made that day,

    Loading our boat with rainbows, quick
        And quivering, while you smoked your clay
    And I took home your "Deadwood Dick"
        In yellow and red, when day was done
    And you took home my Stevenson?

    Not leagues, as when you sailed the deep,
    But only some frail bars of sleep
        Sever us now! Methinks you still
    Recall, as I, in dreams, the quay,
        The little port below the hill:
    And all the changes of the sea,
        Like some great music, can but roll
        Our lives still nearer to the goal.




OUR LADY OF THE TWILIGHT


    Our Lady of the Twilight
          From out the sunset-lands
    Comes gently stealing o'er the world
          And stretches out her hands,
    Over the blotched and broken wall,
          The blind and foetid lane,
    She stretches out her hands and all
          Is beautiful again.

    No factory chimneys can defile
          The beauty of her dress:
    She stoops down with her heavenly smile
          To heal and love and bless:
    All tortured things, all evil powers,
          All shapes of dark distress
    Are turned to fragrance and to flowers
          Beneath her kind caress.

    Our Lady of the Twilight,
          She melts our prison-bars!
    She makes the sea forget the shore,
          She fills the sky with stars,
    And stooping over wharf and mill,
          Chimney and shed and dome,
    Turns them to fairy palaces,
          Then calls her children home.

    She stoops to bless the stunted tree,
          And from the furrowed plain,
    And from the wrinkled brow she smooths
          The lines of care and pain:
    Hers are the gentle hands and eyes
          And hers the peaceful breath
    That ope, in sunset-softened skies,
          The quiet gates of death.

    _Our Lady of the Twilight,
          She hath such gentle hands,
    So lovely are the gifts she brings
          From out the sunset-lands,
    So bountiful, so merciful
          So sweet of soul is she;
    And over all the world she draws
          Her cloak of charity._




THE HILL-FLOWERS

     "_I will lift up mine eyes to the hills"_


    I

    _Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
    Ere I waken in the city--Life, thy dawn makes all things new!
    And up a fir-clad glen, far from all the haunts of men,
    Up a glen among the mountains, oh my feet are wings again!_

    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
    O mountains of my boyhood, I come again to you,
    By the little path I know, with the sea far below,
    And above, the great cloud-galleons with their sails of rose and snow;

    As of old, when all was young, and the earth a song unsung
    And the heather through the crimson dawn its Eden incense flung
    From the mountain-heights of joy, for a careless-hearted boy,
    And the lavrocks rose like fountain sprays of bliss that ne'er could cloy,

    From their little beds of bloom, from the golden gorse and broom,
    With a song to God the Giver, o'er that waste of wild perfume;
    Blowing from height to height, in a glory of great light,
    While the cottage-clustered valleys held the lilac last of night,

    So, when dawn is in the skies, in a dream, a dream, I rise,
    And I follow my lost boyhood to the heights of Paradise.
    Life, thy dawn makes all things new! Hills of Youth, I come to you,
    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew.


    II

    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
    Floats a brother's face to meet me! Is it you? Is it you?
    For the night I leave behind keeps these dazzled eyes still blind!
    But oh, the little hill-flowers, their scent is wise and kind;

    And I shall not lose the way from the darkness to the day,
    While dust can cling as their scent clings to memory for aye;
    And the least link in the chain can recall the whole again,
    And heaven at last resume its far-flung harvests, grain by grain.

    To the hill-flowers clings my dust, and tho' eyeless Death may thrust
    All else into the darkness, in their heaven I put my trust;
    And a dawn shall bid me climb to the little spread of thyme
    Where first I heard the ripple of the fountain-heads of rhyme.

    And a fir-wood that I know, from dawn to sunset-glow,
    Shall whisper to a lonely sea, that swings far, far below.
    Death, thy dawn makes all things new. Hills of Youth, I come to you,
    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew.




THE CAROL OF THE FIR-TREE


    Quoth the Fir-tree, "Orange and vine"
      _Sing 'Nowell, Nowell, Nowell'!_
    "Have their honour: I have mine!"
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "I am kin to the great king's house,"
      _Ring 'Nowell, Nowell, Nowell'!_
    "And Lebanon whispers in my boughs."
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_

    Apple and cherry, pear and plum,
      _Winds of Autumn, sigh 'Nowell_'!
    All the trees like mages come
      _Bending low with 'Gloria'!_
    Holding out on every hand
      _Summer pilgrims to Nowell!_
    Gorgeous gifts from Elfin-land.
      _And the May saith 'Gloria'!_

    Out of the darkness--who shall say
      _Gold and myrrh for this Nowell!_
    How they win their wizard way?
      _Out of the East with 'Gloria'!_
    Men that eat of the sun and dew
      _Angels laugh and sing, 'Nowell.'_
    Call it "fruit," and say it "grew"!
      _Into the West with 'Gloria'!_

    "Leaves that fall," whispered the Fir
      _Through the forest sing 'Nowell'!_
    "I am winter's minister."
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    Summer friends may come and go,
      _Up the mountain sing 'Nowell.'_
    Love abides thro' storm and snow.
      _Down the valley, 'Gloria'!_

    "On my boughs, on mine on mine,"
      _Father and mother, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "All the fruits of the earth shall twine."
      _Bending low with 'Gloria.'_
    "Sword of wood and doll of wax"
      _Little children, sing 'Nowell.'_
    "Swing on the stem was cleft with the axe!"
      _Craftsmen all, a 'Gloria.'_

    "Hear! I have looked on the other side."
      _Out of the East, O sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Because to live this night I died!"
      _Into the West with 'Gloria.'_
    "Hear! In this lighted room I have found"
      _Ye that seek, O sing 'Nowell'!_
    "The spell that worketh underground."
      _Ye that doubt, a 'Gloria.'_

    "I have found it, even I,"
      _Ye that are lowly, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "The secret of this alchemy!"
      _Ye that are poor, a 'Gloria.'_
    "Look, your tinsel turneth to gold."
      _Sing 'Nowell! Nowell! Nowell!'_
    "Your dust to a hand for love to hold!"
      _In Excelsis Gloria._

    "Lay the axe at my young stem now!"
      _Woodman, woodman, sing 'Nowell.'_
    "Set a star on every bough!"
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "Hall and cot shall see me stand,"
      _Rich and poor man, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Giver of gifts from Elfin-land."
      _Oberon, answer 'Gloria.'_

    "Hung by the hilt on your Christmas-tree"
      _Little children, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Your wooden sword is a cross for me."
      _Emperors, a 'Gloria.'_
    "I have found that fabulous stone"
      _Ocean-worthies, cry 'Nowell.'_
    "Which turneth all things into one,"
      _Wise men all, a 'Gloria.'_

    "It is not ruby nor anything"
      _Jeweller, jeweller, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Fit for the crown of an earthly King:"
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "It is not here! It is not there!"
      _Traveller, rest and cry 'Nowell'!_
    "It is one thing and everywhere!"
      _Heaven and Earth sing 'Gloria.'_

    "It is the earth, the moon, the sun,"
      _Mote in the sunbeam, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "And all the stars that march as one."
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "Here, by the touch of it, I can see"
      _Sing, O Life, a sweet Nowell!_
    "The world's King die on a Christmas-tree."
      _Answer, Death, with 'Gloria.'_

    "Here, not set in a realm apart,"
      _East and West are one 'Nowell'!_
    "Holy Land is in your Heart!"
      _North and South one 'Gloria'!_
    "Death is a birth, birth is a death,"
      _Love is all, O sing 'Nowell'!_
    "And London one with Nazareth."
      _And all the World a 'Gloria.'_

    "And angels over your heart's roof sing"
      _Birds of God, O pour 'Nowell'!_
    "That a poor man's son is the Son of a King!"
      _Out of your heart this 'Gloria'!_
    "Round the world you'll not away"
      _In your own soul, they sing 'Nowell'!_
    "From Holy Land this Christmas Day!"
      _In your own soul, this 'Gloria.'_




LAVENDER


    Lavender, lavender
      That makes your linen sweet;
    The hawker brings his basket
      Down the sooty street:
    The dirty doors and pavements
      Are simmering in the heat:
    He brings a dream to London,
      And drags his weary feet.

    Lavender, lavender,
      From where the bee hums,
    To the loud roar of London,
      With purple dreams he comes,
    From raggèd lanes of wild-flowers
      To raggèd London slums,
    With a basket full of lavender
      And purple dreams he comes.

    Is it nought to you that hear him?
      With the old strange cry
    The weary hawker passes,
      And some will come and buy,
    And some will let him pass away
      And only heave a sigh,
    But most will neither heed nor hear
      When dreams go by.

    _Lavender, lavender!
      His songs were fair and sweet,
    He brought us harvests out of heaven,
      Full sheaves of radiant wheat;
    He brought us keys to Paradise,
      And hawked them thro' the street;
    He brought his dreams to London,
      And dragged his weary feet._

    Lavender, lavender!
      He is gone. The sunset glows;
    But through the brain of London
      The mystic fragrance flows.
    Each foggy cell remembers,
      Each raggèd alley knows,
    The land he left behind him,
      The land to which he goes.

