
THE ORPHAN

Anon. (first century B.C.)

    To be an orphan,
    To be fated to be an orphan.
    How bitter is this lot!
    When my father and mother were alive
    I used to ride in a carriage
    With four fine horses.

        But when they both died,
        My brother and sister-in-law
        Sent me out to be a merchant.
    In the south I travelled to the “Nine Rivers”
    And in the east as far as Ch’i and Lu.
    At the end of the year when I came home
    I dared not tell them what I had suffered--
    Of the lice and vermin in my head,
    Of the dust in my face and eyes.
    My brother told me to get ready the dinner.
    My sister-in-law told me to see after the horses.
    I was always going up into the hall
    And running down again to the parlour.
    My tears fell like rain.

    In the morning they sent me to draw water,
    I didn’t get back till night-fall.
    My hands were all sore
    And I had no shoes.
    I walked the cold earth
    Treading on thorns and brambles.
    As I stopped to pull out the thorns,
    How bitter my heart was!
    My tears fell and fell
    And I went on sobbing and sobbing.
    In winter I have no great-coat;
    Nor in summer, thin clothes.
    It is no pleasure to be alive.
    I had rather quickly leave the earth
    And go beneath the Yellow Springs.[4]
    The April winds blow
    And the grass is growing green.
    In the third month--silkworms and mulberries,
    In the sixth month--the melon-harvest.
    I went out with the melon-cart
    And just as I was coming home
    The melon-cart turned over.
    The people who came to help me were few,
    But the people who ate the melons were many,
    All they left me was the stalks--
    To take home as fast as I could.
    My brother and sister-in-law were harsh,
    They asked me all sorts of awful questions.
    Why does everyone in the village hate me?
    I want to write a letter and send it
    To my mother and father under the earth,
    And tell them I can’t go on any longer
    Living with my brother and sister-in-law.

[4] Hades.


THE SICK WIFE

    She had been ill for years and years;
    She sent for me to say something.
    She couldn’t say what she wanted
    Because of the tears that kept coming of themselves.
    “I have burdened you with orphan children,
    With orphan children two or three.
    Don’t let our children go hungry or cold;
    If they do wrong, don’t slap or beat them.
    When you take out the baby, rock it in your arms.
    Don’t forget to do that.”
    Last she said,
    “When I carried them in my arms they had no clothes
    And now their jackets have no linings.”      [_She dies._

    I shut the doors and barred the windows
    And left the motherless children.
    When I got to the market and met my friends, I wept.
    I sat down and could not go with them.
    I asked them to buy some cakes for my children.
    In the presence of my friends I sobbed and cried.
    I tried not to grieve, but sorrow would not cease.
    I felt in my pocket and gave my friends some money.
    When I got home I found my children
    Calling to be taken into their mother’s arms.
    I walked up and down in the empty room
    This way and that a long while.
    Then I went away from it and said to myself
    “I will forget and never speak of her again.”


COCK-CROW SONG

Anon. (first century B.C.)

    In the eastern quarter dawn breaks, the stars flicker pale.
    The morning cock at Ju-nan mounts the wall and crows.
    The songs are over, the clock[5] run down, but still the feast
        is set.
    The moon grows dim and the stars are few; morning has come to
        the world.
    At a thousand gates and ten thousand doors the fish-shaped keys
        turn;
    Round the Palace and up by the Castle, the crows and magpies are
        flying.

[5] A water-clock.


THE GOLDEN PALACE

Anon. (first century B.C.)

              We go to the Golden Palace:
              We set out the jade cups.
              We summon the honoured guests
              To enter at the Golden Gate.
              They enter at the Golden Gate
              And go to the Golden Hall.
    In the Eastern Kitchen the meat is sliced and ready--
    Roast beef and boiled pork and mutton.
    The Master of the Feast hands round the wine.
    The harp-players sound their clear chords.

    The cups are pushed aside and we face each other at chess:
    The rival pawns are marshalled rank against rank.
    The fire glows and the smoke puffs and curls;
    From the incense-burner rises a delicate fragrance.
    The clear wine has made our cheeks red;
    Round the table joy and peace prevail.
    May those who shared in this day’s delight
    Through countless autumns enjoy like felicity.


“OLD POEM”

    At fifteen I went with the army,
    At fourscore I came home.
    On the way I met a man from the village,
    I asked him who there was at home.
    “That over there is your house,
    All covered over with trees and bushes.”
    Rabbits had run in at the dog-hole,
    Pheasants flew down from the beams of the roof.
    In the courtyard was growing some wild grain;
    And by the well, some wild mallows.
    I’ll boil the grain and make porridge,
    I’ll pluck the mallows and make soup.
    Soup and porridge are both cooked,
    But there is no one to eat them with.
    I went out and looked towards the east,
    While tears fell and wetted my clothes.


MEETING IN THE ROAD

    In a narrow road where there was not room to pass
    My carriage met the carriage of a young man.
    And while his axle was touching my axle
    In the narrow road I asked him where he lived.
    “The place where I live is easy enough to find,
    Easy to find and difficult to forget.
    The gates of my house are built of yellow gold,
    The hall of my house is paved with white jade,
    On the hall table flagons of wine are set,
    I have summoned to serve me dancers of Han-tan.[6]
    In the midst of the courtyard grows a cassia-tree,--
    And candles on its branches flaring away in the night.”

[6] Capital of the kingdom of Chao, where the people were famous for
their beauty.


FIGHTING SOUTH OF THE CASTLE

Anon. (_circa_ 124 B.C.)

    They fought south of the Castle,
    They died north of the wall.
    They died in the moors and were not buried.
    Their flesh was the food of crows.
    “Tell the crows we are not afraid;
    We have died in the moors and cannot be buried.
    Crows, how can our bodies escape you?”
    The waters flowed deep
    And the rushes in the pool were dark.
    The riders fought and were slain:
    Their horses wander neighing.
    By the bridge there was a house.[7]
    Was it south, was it north?
    The harvest was never gathered.
    How can we give you your offerings?
    You served your Prince faithfully,
    Though all in vain.
    I think of you, faithful soldiers;
    Your service shall not be forgotten.
    For in the morning you went out to battle
    And at night you did not return.

[7] There is no trace of it left. This passage describes the havoc of
war. The harvest has not been gathered: therefore corn-offerings cannot
be made to the spirits of the dead.


THE EASTERN GATE

Anon. (first century B.C.).

A poor man determines to go out into the world and make his fortune.
His wife tries to detain him.

    I went out at the eastern gate:
    I never thought to return.
    But I came back to the gate with my heart full of sorrow.

           *       *       *       *       *

    There was not a peck of rice in the bin:
    There was not a coat hanging on the pegs.
    So I took my sword and went towards the gate.
    My wife and child clutched at my coat and wept:
    “Some people want to be rich and grand:
    I only want to share my porridge with you.
    Above, we have the blue waves of the sky:
    Below, the yellow face of this little child.”
                  “Dear wife, I cannot stay.
                  Soon it will be too late.
                  When one is growing old
                  One cannot put things off.”


OLD AND NEW

Anon. (first century B.C.)

    She went up the mountain to pluck wild herbs;
    She came down the mountain and met her former husband.
    She knelt down and asked her former husband
    “What do you find your new wife like?”
    “My new wife, although her talk is clever,
    Cannot charm me as my old wife could.
    In beauty of face there is not much to choose.
    But in usefulness they are not at all alike.
    My new wife comes in from the road to meet me;
    My old wife always came down from her tower.
    My new wife is clever at embroidering silk;
    My old wife was good at plain sewing.
    Of silk embroidery one can do an inch a day;
    Of plain sewing, more than five feet.
    Putting her silks by the side of your sewing,
    I see that the new will not compare with the old.”


SOUTH OF THE GREAT SEA

    My love is living
    To the south of the Great Sea.
    What shall I send to greet him?
    Two pearls and a comb of tortoise-shell:
    I’ll send them to him packed in a box of jade.
    They tell me he is not true:
    They tell me he dashed my box to the ground,
    Dashed it to the ground and burnt it
    And scattered its ashes to the wind.
    From this day to the ends of time
    I must never think of him,
    Never again think of him.
    The cocks are crowing,
    And the dogs are barking--
    My brother and his wife will soon know.[8]
    The autumn wind is blowing;
    The morning wind is sighing.
    In a moment the sun will rise in the east
    And then _it_ too will know.

[8] _I.e._, about her engagement being broken off.


THE OTHER SIDE OF THE VALLEY

    I am a prisoner in the hands of the enemy,
    Enduring the shame of captivity.
    My bones stick out and my strength is gone
    Through not getting enough to eat.
    My brother is a Mandarin
    And his horses are fed on maize.
    Why can’t he spare a little money
    To send and ransom me?


OATHS OF FRIENDSHIP

In the country of Yüeh when a man made friends with another they set up
an altar of earth and sacrificed upon it a dog and a cock, reciting this
oath as they did so:

(1)

    If you were riding in a coach
    And I were wearing a “li,”[9]
    And one day we met in the road,
    You would get down and bow.
    If you were carrying a “tēng”[10]
    And I were riding on a horse,
    And one day we met in the road
    I would get down for you.

[9] A peasant’s coat made of straw.

[10] An umbrella under which a cheap-jack sells his wares.

(2)

    Shang Ya!
    I want to be your friend
    For ever and ever without break or decay.
    When the hills are all flat
    And the rivers are all dry,
    When it lightens and thunders in winter,
    When it rains and snows in summer,
    When Heaven and Earth mingle--
    Not till then will I part from you.


BURIAL SONGS

(1)

“The dew on the garlic-leaf,” sung at the burial of kings and
princes.

    How swiftly it dries,
    The dew on the garlic-leaf,
    The dew that dries so fast
    To-morrow will fall again.
    But he whom we carry to the grave
    Will never more return.

(2)

“The Graveyard,” sung at the burial of common men.

    What man’s land is the graveyard?
    It is the crowded home of ghosts,--
    Wise and foolish shoulder to shoulder.
    The King of the Dead claims them all;
    Man’s fate knows no tarrying.


SEVENTEEN OLD POEMS

The following seventeen poems are from a series known as the Nineteen
Pieces of Old Poetry. Some have been attributed to Mei Shēng (first
century B.C.), and one to Fu I (first century A.D.). They are manifestly
not all by the same hand nor of the same date. Internal evidence shows
that No. 3 at least was written after the date of Mei Shēng’s death.
These poems had an enormous influence on all subsequent poetry, and many
of the habitual _clichés_ of Chinese verse are taken from them. I have
omitted two because of their marked inferiority.

(1)

    On and on, always on and on
    Away from you, parted by a life-parting.[11]
    Going from one another ten thousand “li,”
    Each in a different corner of the World.
    The way between is difficult and long,
    Face to face how shall we meet again?
    The Tartar horse prefers the North wind,
    The bird from Yüeh nests on the Southern branch.
    Since we parted the time is already long,
    Daily my clothes hang looser round my waist.
    Floating clouds obscure the white sun,
    The wandering one has quite forgotten home.
    Thinking of you has made me suddenly old,
    The months and years swiftly draw to their close.
    I’ll put you out of my mind and forget for ever
    And try with all my might to eat and thrive.[12]

[11] The opposite of a parting by death.

[12] The popular, but erroneous, interpretation of these two lines is:

“That I’m cast away and rejected I will not repine, But only hope with
all my heart you’re well.”

(2)

    Green, green,
    The grass by the river-bank.
    Thick, thick,
    The willow trees in the garden.
    Sad, sad,
    The lady in the tower.
    White, white,
    Sitting at the casement window.
    Fair, fair,
    Her red-powdered face.
    Small, small,
    She puts out her pale hand.
    Once she was a dancing-house girl.
    Now she is a wandering man’s wife.
    The wandering man went, but did not return.
    It is hard alone to keep an empty bed.

(3)

    Green, green,
    The cypress on the mound.
    Firm, firm,
    The boulder in the stream.
    Man’s life lived within this world,
    Is like the sojourning of a hurried traveller.
    A cup of wine together will make us glad,
    And a little friendship is no little matter.

    Yoking my chariot I urge my stubborn horses.
    I wander about in the streets of Wan and Lo.
    In Lo Town how fine everything is!
    The “Caps and Belts”[13] go seeking each other out.
    The great boulevards are intersected by lanes,
    Wherein are the town-houses of Royal Dukes.
    The two palaces stare at each other from afar,
    The twin gates rise a hundred feet.
    By prolonging the feast let us keep our hearts gay,
    And leave no room for sadness to creep in.

[13] High officers.

(4)

    Of this day’s glorious feast and revel
    The pleasure and delight are difficult to describe.
    Plucking the lute they sent forth lingering sounds,
    The new melodies in beauty reached the divine.
    Skilful singers intoned the high words,
    Those who knew the tune heard the trueness of their singing.
    We sat there each with the same desire
    And like thoughts by each unexpressed:
    “Man in the world lodging for a single life-time
    Passes suddenly like dust borne on the wind.
    Then let us hurry out with high steps
    And be the first to reach the highways and fords:
    Rather than stay at home wretched and poor
    For long years plunged in sordid grief.”

(5)

    In the north-west there is a high house,
    Its top level with the floating clouds.
    Embroidered curtains thinly screen its windows,
    Its storied tower is built on three steps.
    From above there comes a noise of playing and singing,
    The tune sounding, oh! how sad!
    Who can it be, playing so sad a tune?
    Surely it must be Ch’i Liang’s[14] wife.
    The tranquil “D” follows the wind’s rising,
    The middle lay lingers indecisive.
    To each note, two or three sobs,
    Her high will conquered by overwhelming grief.
    She does not regret that she is left so sad,
    But minds that so few can understand her song.
    She wants to become those two wild geese
    That with beating wings rise high aloft.

[14] Who had no father, no husband, and no children.

(6)

    Crossing the river I pluck hibiscus-flowers:
    In the orchid-swamps are many fragrant herbs.
    I gather them, but who shall I send them to?
    My love is living in lands far away.
    I turn and look towards my own country:
    The long road stretches on for ever.
    The same heart, yet a different dwelling:
    Always fretting, till we are grown old!

(7)

    A bright moon illumines the night-prospect:
    The house-cricket chirrups on the eastern wall.
    The Handle of the Pole-star points to the Beginning of Winter.
    The host of stars is scattered over the sky.

    The white dew wets the moor-grasses,--
    With sudden swiftness the times and seasons change.
    The autumn cicada sings among the trees,
    The swallows, alas, whither are they gone?

    Once I had a same-house friend,
    He took flight and rose high away.
    He did not remember how once we went hand in hand,
    But left me like footsteps behind one in the dust.

    In the South is the Winnowing-fan and the Pole-star in the North,
    And a Herd-boy[15] whose ox has never borne the yoke.
    A friend who is not firm as a great rock
    Is of no profit and idly bears the name.

[15] Name of a star. The Herd-boy, who is only figuratively speaking a
herd-boy, is like the friend who is no real friend.

(8)

    In the courtyard there grows a strange tree,
    Its green leaves ooze with a fragrant moisture.
    Holding the branch I cut a flower from the tree,
    Meaning to send it away to the person I love.
    Its sweet smell fills my sleeves and lap.
    The road is long, how shall I get it there?
    Such a thing is not fine enough to send:
    But it may remind him of the time that has past since he left.[16]

[16] _I.e._ (supposing he went away in the autumn), remind him that
spring has come.

(9)

    Far away twinkles the Herd-boy star;
    Brightly shines the Lady of the Han River.
    Slender, slender she plies her white fingers.
    Click, click go the wheels of her spinning-loom.
    At the end of the day she has not finished her task;
    Her bitter tears fall like streaming rain.
    The Han River runs shallow and clear;
    Set between them, how short a space!
    But the river water will not let them pass,
    Gazing at each other but never able to speak.

(10)

    Turning my chariot I yoke my horses and go.
    On and on down the long roads
    The autumn winds shake the hundred grasses.
    On every side, how desolate and bare!
    The things I meet are all new things,
    Their strangeness hastens the coming of old age.
    Prosperity and decay each have their season.
    Success is bitter when it is slow in coming.
    Man’s life is not metal or stone,
    He cannot far prolong the days of his fate.
    Suddenly he follows in the way of things that change.
    Fame is the only treasure that endures.

(11)

    The Eastern Castle stands tall and high;
    Far and wide stretch the towers that guard it.
    The whirling wind uprises and shakes the earth;
    The autumn grasses grow thick and green.

    The four seasons alternate without pause,
    The year’s end hurries swiftly on.
    The Bird of the Morning Wind is stricken with sorrow;
    The frail cicada suffers and is hard pressed.
    Free and clear, let us loosen the bonds of our hearts.
    Why should we go on always restraining and binding?
    In Yen and Chao are many fair ladies,
    Beautiful people with faces like jade.
    Their clothes are made all of silk gauze.
    They stand at the door practising tranquil lays.
    The echo of their singing, how sad it sounds!
    By the pitch of the song one knows the stops have been tightened.
    To ease their minds they arrange their shawls and belts;
    Lowering their song, a little while they pause.
    “I should like to be those two flying swallows
    Who are carrying clay to nest in the eaves of your house.”

(12)

    I drive my chariot up to the Eastern Gate;
    From afar I see the graveyard north of the Wall.
    The white aspens how they murmur, murmur;
    Pines and cypresses flank the broad paths.
    Beneath lie men who died long ago;
    Black, black is the long night that holds them.
    Deep down beneath the Yellow Springs,
    Thousands of years they lie without waking.

    In infinite succession light and darkness shift,
    And years vanish like the morning dew.
    Man’s life is like a sojourning,
    His longevity lacks the firmness of stone and metal.
    For ever it has been that mourners in their turn were mourned,
    Saint and Sage,--all alike are trapped.
    Seeking by food to obtain Immortality
    Many have been the dupe of strange drugs.
    Better far to drink good wine
    And clothe our bodies in robes of satin and silk.

(13) CONTINUATION OF (12)

    The dead are gone and with them we cannot converse.
    The living are here and ought to have our love.
    Leaving the city-gate I look ahead
    And see before me only mounds and tombs.
    The old graves are ploughed up into fields,
    The pines and cypresses are hewn for timber.
    In the white aspens sad winds sing;
    Their long murmuring kills my heart with grief.
    I want to go home, to ride to my village gate.
    I want to go back, but there’s no road back.

(14)

    The years of a lifetime do not reach a hundred.
    Yet they contain a thousand years’ sorrow.
    When days are short and the dull nights long,
    Why not take a lamp and wander forth?
    If you want to be happy you must do it now,
    There is no waiting till an after-time.
    The fool who’s loath to spend the wealth he’s got
    Becomes the laughing-stock of after ages.
    It is true that Master Wang became immortal,
    But how can _we_ hope to share his lot?

(15)

    Cold, cold the year draws to its end,
    The crickets and grasshoppers make a doleful chirping.
    The chill wind increases its violence.
    My wandering love has no coat to cover him.
    He gave his embroidered furs to the Lady of Lo,
    But from me his bedfellow he is quite estranged.
    Sleeping alone in the depth of the long night
    In a dream I thought I saw the light of his face.
    My dear one thought of our old joys together,
    He came in his chariot and gave me the front reins.
    I wanted so to prolong our play and laughter,
    To hold his hand and go back with him in his coach.
    But, when he had come he would not stay long
    Nor stop to go with me to the Inner Chamber.
    Truly without the falcon’s wings to carry me
    How can I rival the flying wind’s swiftness?
    I go and lean at the gate and think of my grief,
    My falling tears wet the double gates.

(16)

    At the beginning of winter a cold spirit comes,
    The North Wind blows--chill, chill.
    My sorrows being many, I know the length of the nights,
    Raising my head I look at the stars in their places.
    On the fifteenth day the bright moon is full,
    On the twentieth day the “toad and hare” wane.[17]
    A stranger came to me from a distant land
    And brought me a single scroll with writing on it;
    At the top of the scroll was written “Do not forget,”
    At the bottom was written “Goodbye for Ever.”
    I put the letter away in the folds of my dress,
    For three years the writing did not fade.
    How with an undivided heart I loved you
    I fear that you will never know or guess.

[17] The “toad and hare” correspond to our “man in the moon.” The waning
of the moon symbolizes the waning of the lover’s affection.

(17)

    The bright moon, oh, how white it shines,
    Shines down on the gauze curtains of my bed.
    Racked by sorrow I toss and cannot sleep.
    Picking up my clothes, I wander up and down.
    My absent love says that he is happy,
    But I would rather he said he was coming back.
    Out in the courtyard I stand hesitating, alone.
    To whom can I tell the sad thoughts I think?
    Staring before me I enter my room again;
    Falling tears wet my mantle and robe.


THE AUTUMN WIND

By Wu-ti (157-87 B.C.), sixth emperor of the Han dynasty. He came to the
throne when he was only sixteen. In this poem he regrets that he is
obliged to go on an official journey, leaving his mistress behind in the
capital. He is seated in his state barge surrounded by his ministers.

    Autumn wind rises: white clouds fly.
    Grass and trees wither: geese go south.
    Orchids all in bloom: chrysanthemums smell sweet.
    I think of my lovely lady: I never can forget.
    Floating-pagoda boat crosses Fēn River.
    Across the mid-stream white waves rise
    Flute and drum keep time to sound of the rowers’ song;
    Amidst revel and feasting, sad thoughts come;
    Youth’s years how few! Age how sure!


LI FU-JĒN

    The sound of her silk skirt has stopped.
    On the marble pavement dust grows.
    Her empty room is cold and still.
    Fallen leaves are piled against the doors.
                    Longing for that lovely lady
    How can I bring my aching heart to rest?

The above poem was written by Wu-ti when his mistress, Li Fu-jēn, died.
Unable to bear his grief, he sent for wizards from all parts of China,
hoping that they would be able to put him into communication with her
spirit. At last one of them managed to project her shape on to a
curtain. The emperor cried:

  Is it or isn’t it?
  I stand and look.
  The swish, swish of a silk skirt.
  How slow she comes!


SONG OF SNOW-WHITE HEADS

Ssŭ-ma Hsiang-ju was a young poet who had lost his position at court
owing to ill-health. One day Cho Wēn-chün, a rich man’s daughter, heard
him singing at a feast given by her father. She eloped with him that
night, and they set up a wine-shop together. After a time Hsiang-ju
became famous as a poet, but his character was marred by love of money.
He sold love-poems, which the ladies of the palace sent to the emperor
in order to win his favour. Finally, he gave presents to the “ladies of
Mo-ling,” hoping to secure a concubine. It was this step that induced
his mistress, Cho Wēn-chün, to write the following poem.

    Our love was pure
    As the snow on the mountains:
    White as a moon
    Between the clouds--
    They’re telling me
    Your thoughts are double
    That’s why I’ve come
    To break it off.
    To-day we’ll drink
    A cup of wine.
    To-morrow we’ll part
    Beside the Canal:
    Walking about
    Beside the Canal,
    Where its branches divide
    East and west.
    Alas and alas,
    And again alas.
    So must a girl
    Cry when she’s married,
    If she find not a man
    Of single heart,
    Who will not leave her
    Till her hair is white.


TO HIS WIFE

By General Su Wu (_circa_ 100 B.C.)

    Since our hair was plaited and we became man and wife
    The love between us was never broken by doubt.
    So let us be merry this night together,
    Feasting and playing while the good time lasts.

           *       *       *       *       *

    I suddenly remember the distance that I must travel;
    I spring from bed and look out to see the time.
    The stars and planets are all grown dim in the sky;
    Long, long is the road; I cannot stay.
    I am going on service, away to the battle-ground,
    And I do not know when I shall come back.
    I hold your hand with only a deep sigh;
    Afterwards, tears--in the days when we are parted.
    With all your might enjoy the spring flowers,
    But do not forget the time of our love and pride.
    Know that if I live, I will come back again,
    And if I die, we will go on thinking of each other.


LI LING

(Parting from Su Wu)

    The good time will never come back again:
    In a moment,--our parting will be over.
    Anxiously--we halt at the road-side,
    Hesitating--we embrace where the fields begin.
    The clouds above are floating across the sky:
    Swiftly, swiftly passing: or blending together.
    The waves in the wind lose their fixed place
    And are rolled away each to a corner of Heaven.
    From now onwards--long must be our parting.
    So let us stop again for a little while.
    I wish I could ride on the wings of the morning wind
    And go with you right to your journey’s end.

Li Ling and Su Wu were both prisoners in the land of the Huns. After
nineteen years Su Wu was released. Li Ling would not go back with him.
When invited to do so, he got up and danced, singing:

    I came ten thousand leagues
    Across sandy deserts
    In the service of my Prince,
    To break the Hun tribes.
    My way was blocked and barred,
    My arrows and sword broken.
    My armies had faded away,
    My reputation had gone.

           *       *       *       *       *

    My old mother is long dead.
    Although I want to requite my Prince
              How can I return?


LAMENT OF HSI-CHÜN

About the year 110 B.C. a Chinese Princess named Hsi-chün was sent, for
political reasons, to be the wife of a central Asian nomad king, K’un
Mo, king of the Wu-sun. When she got there, she found her husband old
and decrepit. He only saw her once or twice a year, when they drank a
cup of wine together. They could not converse, as they had no language
in common.

    My people have married me
    In a far corner of Earth:
    Sent me away to a strange land,
    To the king of the Wu-sun.
    A tent is my house,
    Of felt are my walls;
    Raw flesh my food
    With mare’s milk to drink.
    Always thinking of my own country,
    My heart sad within.
    Would I were a yellow stork
    And could fly to my old home!


CH’IN CHIA

Ch’in Chia (first century A.D.) was summoned to take up an appointment
at the capital at a time when his wife was ill and staying with her
parents. He was therefore unable to say goodbye to her, and sent her
three poems instead. This is the last of the three.

    Solemn, solemn the coachman gets ready to go:
    “Chiang, chiang” the harness bells ring.
    At break of dawn I must start on my long journey:
    At cock-crow I must gird on my belt.
    I turn back and look at the empty room:
    For a moment I almost think I see you there.
    One parting, but ten thousand regrets:
    As I take my seat, my heart is unquiet.
    What shall I do to tell you all my thoughts?
    How can I let you know of all my love?
    Precious hairpins make the head to shine
    And bright mirrors can reflect beauty.
    Fragrant herbs banish evil smells
    And the scholar’s harp has a clear note.
    The man in the Book of Odes[18] who was given a quince
    Wanted to pay it back with diamonds and rubies.
    When I think of all the things you have done for me,
    How ashamed I am to have done so little for you!
    Although I know that it is a poor return,
    All I can give you is this description of my feelings.

[18] Odes, v, 10.


CH’IN CHIA’S WIFE’S REPLY

    My poor body is alas unworthy:
    I was ill when first you brought me home.
    Limp and weary in the house--
    Time passed and I got no better.
    We could hardly ever see each other:
    I could not serve you as I ought.
    Then you received the Imperial Mandate:
    You were ordered to go far away to the City.
    Long, long must be our parting:
    I was not destined to tell you my thoughts.
    I stood on tiptoe gazing into the distance,
    Interminably gazing at the road that had taken you.
    With thoughts of you my mind is obsessed:
    In my dreams I see the light of your face.
    Now you are started on your long journey
    Each day brings you further from me.
    Oh that I had a bird’s wings
    And high flying could follow you.
    Long I sob and long I cry:
    The tears fall down and wet my skirt.


SONG

By Sung Tzŭ-hou (second century A.D.)

    On the Eastern Way at the city of Lo-yang
    At the edge of the road peach-trees and plum-trees grow;
    On the two sides,--flower matched by flower;
    Across the road,--leaf touching leaf.

    A spring wind rises from the north-east;
    Flowers and leaves gently nod and sway.
    Up the road somebody’s daughter comes
    Carrying a basket, to gather silkworms’ food.

    (_She sees the fruit trees in blossom and, forgetting about her
    silkworms, begins to pluck the branches._)

    With her slender hand she breaks a branch from the tree;
    The flowers fall, tossed and scattered in the wind.

_The tree says:_

    “Lovely lady, I never did you harm;
    Why should you hate me and do me injury?”

_The lady answers:_

    “At high autumn in the eighth and ninth moons
    When the white dew changes to hoar-frost,
    At the year’s end the wind would have lashed your boughs,
    Your sweet fragrance could not have lasted long.
    Though in the autumn your leaves patter to the ground,
    When spring comes, your gay bloom returns.
    But in men’s lives when their bright youth is spent
    Joy and love never come back again.”




CHAPTER II


SATIRE ON PAYING CALLS IN AUGUST

By Ch’ēng Hsiao (_circa_ A.D. 250)


    When I was young, throughout the hot season
    There were no carriages driving about the roads.
    People shut their doors and lay down in the cool:
    Or if they went out, it was not to pay calls.
    Nowadays--ill-bred, ignorant fellows,
    When they feel the heat, make for a friend’s house.
    The unfortunate host, when he hears someone coming
    Scowls and frowns, but can think of no escape.
    “There’s nothing for it but to rise and go to the door,”
    And in his comfortable seat he groans and sighs.

           *       *       *       *       *

    The conversation does not end quickly:
    Prattling and babbling, what a lot he says!
    Only when one is almost dead with fatigue
    He asks at last if one isn’t finding him tiring.
    (One’s arm is almost in half with continual fanning:
    The sweat is pouring down one’s neck in streams.)
    Do not say that this is a small matter:
    I consider the practice a blot on our social life.
    I therefore caution all wise men
    That August visitors should not be admitted.


ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER

By Wei Wēn-ti, son of Ts’ao Ts’ao, who founded the dynasty of Wei, and
died in A.D. 220. (The poem has been wrongly attributed to Han Wēn-ti,
died 157 B.C.)

    I look up and see / his curtains and bed:
    I look down and examine / his table and mat.
    The things are there / just as before.
    But the man they belonged to / is not there.
    His spirit suddenly / has taken flight
    And left me behind / far away.
    To whom shall I look / on whom rely?
    My tears flow / in an endless stream.
    “Yu, yu” / cry the wandering deer
    As they carry fodder / to their young in the wood.
    Flap, flap / fly the birds
    As they carry their little ones / back to the nest.
    I alone / am desolate
    Dreading the days / of our long parting:
    My grieving heart’s / settled pain
    No one else / can understand.
    There is a saying / among people
    “Sorrow makes us / grow old.”
    Alas, alas / for my white hairs!
    All too early / they have come!
    Long wailing, / long sighing
    My thoughts are fixed on my sage parent.
    They say the good / live long:
    Then why was he / not spared?


THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST WU

TWO POEMS

By Wei Wēn-ti (A.D. 188-227)

(1)

    My charioteer hastens to yoke my carriage,
    For I must go on a journey far away.
    “Where are you going on your journey far away?”
    To the land of Wu where my enemies are.
    But I must ride many thousand miles,
    Beyond the Eastern Road that leads to Wu.
    Between the rivers bitter winds blow,
    Swiftly flow the waters of Huai and Ssŭ.
    I want to take a skiff and cross these rivers,
    But alas for me, where shall I find a boat?
    To sit idle is not my desire:
    Gladly enough would I go to my country’s aid.

(2)

(_He abandons the campaign_)

    In the North-west there is a floating cloud
    Stretched on high, like a chariot’s canvas-awning.
    Alas that I was born in these times,
    To be blown along like a cloud puffed by the wind!
    It has blown me away far to the South-east,
    On and on till I came to Wu-hui.
    Wu-hui is not my country:
    Why should I go on staying and staying here?
    I will give it up and never speak of it again,--
    This being abroad and always living in dread.


THE RUINS OF LO-YANG

By Ts’ao Chih (A.D. 192-233), third son of Ts’ao Ts’ao. He was a great
favourite with his father till he made a mistake in a campaign. In this
poem he returns to look at the ruins of Lo-yang, where he used to live.
It had been sacked by Tung Cho.

    I climb to the ridge of Pei Mang Mountain
    And look down on the city of Lo-yang.
    In Lo-yang how still it is!
    Palaces and houses all burnt to ashes.
    Walls and fences all broken and gaping,
    Thorns and brambles shooting up to the sky.
    I do not see the old old-men:
    I only see the new young men.
    I turn aside, for the straight road is lost:
    The fields are overgrown and will never be ploughed again.
    I have been away such a long time
    That I do not know which street is which.
    How sad and ugly the empty moors are!
    A thousand miles without the smoke of a chimney.
    I think of the house I lived in all those years:
                  I am heart-tied and cannot speak.

The above poem vaguely recalls a famous Anglo-Saxon fragment which I
will make intelligible by semi-translation:

  “Wondrous was the wall-stone,
  Weirdly[19] broken;
  Burgh-steads bursten,
  Giants’ work tumbleth,
  Roofs are wrenched,
  Towers totter,
  Bereft of rune-gates.
  Smoke is on the plaster,
  Scarred the shower-burghs,
  Shorn and shattered,
  By eld under-eaten.
  Earth’s grip haveth
  Wealders[20] and workmen.”

[19] By Fate.

[20] Rulers.


THE COCK-FIGHT

By Ts’ao Chih

    Our wandering eyes are sated with the dancer’s skill.
    Our ears are weary with the sound of “kung” and “shang.”[21]
    Our host is silent and sits doing nothing:
    All the guests go on to places of amusement.

           *       *       *       *       *

    On long benches the sportsmen sit ranged
    Round a cleared room, watching the fighting-cocks.
    The gallant birds are all in battle-trim:
    They raise their tails and flap defiantly.
    Their beating wings stir the calm air:
    Their angry eyes gleam with a red light.
    Where their beaks have struck, the fine feathers are scattered:
    With their strong talons they wound again and again.
    Their long cries enter the blue clouds;
    Their flapping wings tirelessly beat and throb.
    “Pray God the lamp-oil lasts a little longer,
    Then I shall not leave without winning the match!”

[21] Notes of the scale.


A VISION

By Ts’ao Chih

    In the Nine Provinces there is not room enough:
    I want to soar high among the clouds,
    And, far beyond the Eight Limits of the compass,
    Cast my gaze across the unmeasured void.
    I will wear as my gown the red mists of sunrise,
    And as my skirt the white fringes of the clouds:
    My canopy--the dim lustre of Space:
    My chariot--six dragons mounting heavenward:
    And before the light of Time has shifted a pace
    Suddenly stand upon the World’s blue rim.
      The doors of Heaven swing open,
    The double gates shine with a red light.
    I roam and linger in the palace of Wēn-ch’ang,[22]
    I climb up to the hall of T’ai-wei.[22]
    The Lord God lies at his western lattice:
    And the lesser Spirits are together in the eastern gallery.
    They wash me in a bath of rainbow-spray
    And gird me with a belt of jasper and rubies.
    I wander at my ease gathering divine herbs:
    I bend down and touch the scented flowers.
    Wang-tzŭ[23] gives me drugs of long-life
    And Hsien-mēn[23] hands me strange potions.
    By the partaking of food I evade the rites of Death:
    My span is extended to the enjoyment of life everlasting.

[22] Stars.

[23] Immortals.


THE CURTAIN OF THE WEDDING BED

By Liu Hsün’s wife (third century A.D.).

After she had been married to him for a long while, General Liu Hsün
sent his wife back to her home, because he had fallen in love with a
girl of the Ssu-ma family.

    Flap, flap, you curtain in front of our bed!
    I hung you there to screen us from the light of day.
    I brought you with me when I left my father’s house;
    Now I am taking you back with me again.
    I will fold you up and lay you flat in your box.
    Curtain--shall I ever take you out again?


REGRET

By Yüan Chi (A.D. 210-263)

    When I was young I learnt fencing
    And was better at it than Crooked Castle.[24]
    My spirit was high as the rolling clouds
    And my fame resounded beyond the World.
    I took my sword to the desert sands,
    I drank my horse at the Nine Moors.
    My flags and banners flapped in the wind,
    And nothing was heard but the song of my drums.

           *       *       *       *       *

    War and its travels have made me sad,
    And a fierce anger burns within me:
    It’s thinking of how I’ve wasted my time
    That makes this fury tear my heart.

[24] A famous general.


TAOIST SONG

By Chi K’ang (A.D. 223-262)

    I will cast out Wisdom and reject Learning.
    My thoughts shall wander in the Great Void (_bis_).
    Always repenting of wrongs done
    Will never bring my heart to rest.
    I cast my hook in a single stream;
    But my joy is as though I possessed a Kingdom.
    I loose my hair and go singing;
    To the four frontiers men join in my refrain.
    This is the purport of my song:
    “My thoughts shall wander in the Great Void.”


A GENTLE WIND

By Fu Hsüan (died A.D. 278)

    A gentle wind fans the calm night:
    A bright moon shines on the high tower.
    A voice whispers, but no one answers when I call:
    A shadow stirs, but no one comes when I beckon.
    The kitchen-man brings in a dish of lentils:
    Wine is there, but I do not fill my cup.
    Contentment with poverty is Fortune’s best gift:
    Riches and Honour are the handmaids of Disaster.
    Though gold and gems by the world are sought and prized,
    To me they seem no more than weeds or chaff.


WOMAN

By Fu Hsüan

    How sad it is to be a woman!
    Nothing on earth is held so cheap.
    Boys stand leaning at the door
    Like Gods fallen out of Heaven.
    Their hearts brave the Four Oceans,
    The wind and dust of a thousand miles.
    No one is glad when a girl is born:
    By _her_ the family sets no store.
    When she grows up, she hides in her room
    Afraid to look a man in the face.
    No one cries when she leaves her home--
    Sudden as clouds when the rain stops.
    She bows her head and composes her face,
    Her teeth are pressed on her red lips:
    She bows and kneels countless times.
    She must humble herself even to the servants.
    _His_ love is distant as the stars in Heaven,
    Yet the sunflower bends toward the sun.
    Their hearts more sundered than water and fire--
    A hundred evils are heaped upon her.
    Her face will follow the years’ changes:
    Her lord will find new pleasures.
    They that were once like substance and shadow
    Are now as far as Hu from Ch’in.[25]
    Yet Hu and Ch’in shall sooner meet
    Than they whose parting is like Ts’an and Ch’ēn.[26]

[25] Two lands.

[26] Two stars.


DAY DREAMS

By Tso Ssŭ (third century A.D.)

    When I was young I played with a soft brush
    And was passionately devoted to reading all sorts of books.
    In prose I made Chia I my standard:
    In verse I imitated Ssŭ-ma Hsiang-ju.
    But then the arrows began singing at the frontier.
    And a winged summons came flying to the City.
    Although arms were not my profession,
    I had once read Jang-Chū’s war-book.
    I shouted aloud and my cries rent the air:
    I felt as though Tung Wu were already annihilated.
    The scholar’s knife cuts best at its first use
    And my dreams hurried on to the completion of my plan.
    I wanted at a stroke to clear the Yang-tze and Hsiang,
    And at a glance to quell the Tibetans and Hu.
    When my task was done, I should not accept a barony,
    But refusing with a bow, retire to a cottage in the country.


THE SCHOLAR IN THE NARROW STREET

By Tso Ssŭ

    Flap, flap, the captive bird in the cage
    Beating its wings against the four corners.
    Depressed, depressed the scholar in the narrow street:
    Clasping a shadow, he dwells in an empty house.
    When he goes out, there is nowhere for him to go:
    Bunches and brambles block up his path.
    He composes a memorial, but it is rejected and unread,
    He is left stranded, like a fish in a dry pond.
    Without--he has not a single farthing of salary:
    Within--there is not a peck of grain in his larder.
    His relations upbraid him for his lack of success:
    His friends and callers daily decrease in number.
    Su Ch’in used to go preaching in the North
    And Li Ssŭ sent a memorandum to the West.
    I once hoped to pluck the fruits of life:
    But now alas, they are all withered and dry.
    Though one drinks at a river, one cannot drink more than a bellyful;
    Enough is good, but there is no use in satiety.
    The bird in a forest can perch but on one bough,
    And this should be the wise man’s pattern.


THE DESECRATION OF THE HAN TOMBS

By Chang Tsai (third century A.D.)

    At Pei-mang how they rise to Heaven,
    Those high mounds, four or five in the fields!
    What men lie buried under these tombs?
    All of them were Lords of the Han world.
    “Kung” and “Wēn”[27] gaze across at each other:
    The Yüan mound is all grown over with weeds.
    When the dynasty was falling, tumult and disorder arose,
    Thieves and robbers roamed like wild beasts.
    Of earth[28] they have carried away more than one handful,
    They have gone into vaults and opened the secret doors.
    Jewelled scabbards lie twisted and defaced:
    The stones that were set in them, thieves have carried away,
    The ancestral temples are hummocks in the ground:
    The walls that went round them are all levelled flat.
    Over everything the tangled thorns are growing:
    A herd-boy pushes through them up the path.
    Down in the thorns rabbits have made their burrows:
    The weeds and thistles will never be cleared away.
    Over the tombs the ploughshare will be driven
    And peasants will have their fields and orchards there.
    They that were once lords of a thousand hosts
    Are now become the dust of the hills and ridges.
    I think of what Yün-mēn[29] said
    And am sorely grieved at the thought of “then” and “now.”

[27] Names of two tombs.

[28] In the early days of the dynasty a man stole a handful of earth
from the imperial tombs, and was executed by the police. The emperor was
furious at the lightness of the punishment.

[29] Yün-mēn said to Mēng Ch’ang-chün (died 279 B.C.), “Does it not
grieve you to think that after a hundred years this terrace will be cast
down and this pond cleared away?” Mēng Ch’ang-chün wept.


BEARER’S SONG

By Miu Hsi (died A.D. 245). _Cf._ the “Han Burial Songs,” p. 38.

    When I was alive, I wandered in the streets of the Capital:
    Now that I am dead, I am left to lie in the fields.
    In the morning I drove out from the High Hall:
    In the evening I lodged beneath the Yellow Springs.[30]
    When the white sun had sunk in the Western Chasm
    I hung up my chariot and rested my four horses.
    Now, even the mighty Maker of All
    Could not bring the life back to my limbs.
    Shape and substance day by day will vanish:
    Hair and teeth will gradually fall away.
    Forever from of old men have been so:
    And none born can escape this thing.

[30] Hades.


THE VALLEY WIND

By Lu Yün (fourth century A.D.)

    Living in retirement beyond the World,
    Silently enjoying isolation,
    I pull the rope of my door tighter
    And stuff my window with roots and ferns.
    My spirit is tuned to the Spring-season:
    At the fall of the year there is autumn in my heart.
    Thus imitating cosmic changes
    My cottage becomes a Universe.




CHAPTER III

POEMS BY T’AO CH’IEN


(1)

    Shady, shady the wood in front of the Hall:
    At midsummer full of calm shadows.
    The south wind follows summer’s train:
    With its eddying-puffs it blows open my coat.
    I am free from ties and can live a life of retirement.
    When I rise from sleep, I play with books and harp.
    The lettuce in the garden still grows moist:
    Of last year’s grain there is always plenty left.
    Self-support should maintain strict limits:
    More than enough is not what I want.
    I grind millet and make good wine:
    When the wine is heated, I pour it out for myself.
    My little children are playing at my side,
    Learning to talk, they babble unformed sounds.
    These things have made me happy again
    And I forget my lost cap of office.
    Distant, distant I gaze at the white clouds:
    With a deep yearning I think of the Sages of Antiquity.


(2)

    In the quiet of the morning I heard a knock at my door:
    I threw on my clothes and opened it myself.
    I asked who it was who had come so early to see me:
    He said he was a peasant, coming with good intent.
    He brought a present of wine and rice-soup,
    Believing that I had fallen on evil days.
    “You live in rags under a thatched roof
    And seem to have no desire for a better lot.
    The rest of mankind have all the same ambitions:
    You, too, must learn to wallow in their mire.”
    “Old man, I am impressed by what you say,
    But my soul is not fashioned like other men’s.
    To drive in their rut I might perhaps learn:
    To be untrue to myself could only lead to muddle.
    Let us drink and enjoy together the wine you have brought:
    For my course is set and cannot now be altered.”


(3)

    A long time ago
    I went on a journey,
    Right to the corner
    Of the Eastern Ocean.
    The road there
    Was long and winding,
    And stormy waves
    Barred my path.
    What made me
    Go this way?
    Hunger drove me
    Into the World.
    I tried hard
    To fill my belly:
    And even a little
    Seemed a lot.
    But this was clearly
    A bad bargain,
    So I went home
    And lived in idleness.


(4)

SUBSTANCE, SHADOW, AND SPIRIT

    High and low, wise and simple, all busily hoard up the
          moments of life. How greatly they err!

    Therefore I have to the uttermost exposed the bitterness
          both of Substance and Shadow, and have made
          Spirit show how, by following Nature, we may dissolve
          this bitterness.

_Substance speaks to Shadow_:

    Heaven and Earth exist for ever:
    Mountains and rivers never change.
    But herbs and trees in perpetual rotation
    Are renovated and withered by the dews and frosts:
    And Man the wise, Man the divine--
    Shall he alone escape this law?
    Fortuitously appearing for a moment in the World
    He suddenly departs, never to return.
    How can he know that the friends he has left
    Are missing him and thinking of him?
    Only the things that he used remain;
    They look upon them and their tears flow.
    Me no magical arts can save,
    Though you may hope for a wizard’s aid.
    I beg you listen to this advice--
    When you can get wine, be sure to drink it.

_Shadow replies_:

    There is no way to preserve life.
    Drugs of Immortality are instruments of folly.
    I would gladly wander in Paradise,
    But it is far away and there is no road.
    Since the day that I was joined to you
    We have shared all our joys and pains.
    While you rested in the shade, I left you a while:
    But till the end we shall be together.
    Our joint existence is impermanent:
    Sadly together we shall slip away.
    That when the body decays Fame should also go
    Is a thought unendurable, burning the heart.
    Let us strive and labour while yet we may
    To do some deed that men will praise.
    Wine may in truth dispel our sorrow,
    But how compare it with lasting Fame?

_Spirit expounds_:

    God can only set in motion:
    He cannot control the things he has made.
    Man, the second of the Three Orders,
    Owes his precedence to Me.
    Though I am different from you,
    We were born involved in one another:
    Nor by any means can we escape
    The intimate sharing of good and ill.
    The Three Emperors were saintly men,
    Yet to-day--where are they?
    P’ēng[31] lived to a great age,
    Yet he went at last, when he longed to stay.
    And late or soon, all go:
    Wise and simple have no reprieve.
    Wine may bring forgetfulness,
    But does it not hasten old-age?
    If you set your heart on noble deeds,
    How do you know that any will praise you?
    By all this thinking you do Me injury:
    You had better go where Fate leads--
    Drift on the Stream of Infinite Flux,
    Without joy, without fear:
    When you must go--then go,
    And make as little fuss as you can.

[31] The Chinese Methuselah.


(5)

    Chill and harsh the year draws to its close:
    In my cotton dress I seek sunlight on the porch.
    In the southern orchard all the leaves are gone:
    In the north garden rotting boughs lie heaped.
    I empty my cup and drink it down to the dregs:
    I look towards the kitchen, but no smoke rises.
    Poems and books lie piled beside my chair:
    But the light is going and I shall not have time to read them.
    My life here is not like the Agony in Ch’ēn,[32]
    But often I have to bear bitter reproaches.
    Let me then remember, to calm my heart’s distress,
    That the Sages of old were often in like case.

[32] Confucius was maltreated in Ch’ēn.


(6)

BLAMING SONS

(AN APOLOGY FOR HIS OWN DRUNKENNESS)

    White hair covers my temples,
    I am wrinkled and seared beyond repair,
    And though I have got five sons,
    They all hate paper and brush.
    A-shu is eighteen:
    For laziness there is none like him.
    A-hsüan does his best,
    But really loathes the Fine Arts.
    Yung-tuan is thirteen.
    But does not know “six” from “seven.”[33]
    T’ung-tzŭ in his ninth year
    Is only concerned with things to eat.
    If Heaven treats me like this,
    What can I do but fill my cup?

[33] Written in Chinese with two characters very easy to distinguish.


(7)

    I built my hut in a zone of human habitation,
    Yet near me there sounds no noise of horse or coach.
      Would you know how that is possible?
    A heart that is distant creates a wilderness round it.
    I pluck chrysanthemums under the eastern hedge,
    Then gaze long at the distant summer hills.
    The mountain air is fresh at the dusk of day:
    The flying birds two by two return.
    In these things there lies a deep meaning;
    Yet when we would express it, words suddenly fail us.


(8)

MOVING HOUSE

    My old desire to live in the Southern Village
    Was not because I had taken a fancy to the house.
    But I heard it was a place of simple-minded men
    With whom it were a joy to spend the mornings and evenings.
    Many years I had longed to settle here:
    Now at last I have managed to move house.
    I do not mind if my cottage is rather small
    So long as there’s room enough for bed and mat.
    Often and often the neighbours come to see me
    And with brave words discuss the things of old.
    Rare writings we read together and praise:
    Doubtful meanings we examine together and settle.


(9)

RETURNING TO THE FIELDS

    When I was young, I was out of tune with the herd:
    My only love was for the hills and mountains.
    Unwitting I fell into the Web of the World’s dust
    And was not free until my thirtieth year.
    The migrant bird longs for the old wood:
    The fish in the tank thinks of its native pool.
    I had rescued from wildness a patch of the Southern Moor
    And, still rustic, I returned to field and garden.
    My ground covers no more than ten acres:
    My thatched cottage has eight or nine rooms.
    Elms and willows cluster by the eaves:
    Peach trees and plum trees grow before the Hall.
    Hazy, hazy the distant hamlets of men.
    Steady the smoke of the half-deserted village,
    A dog barks somewhere in the deep lanes,
    A cock crows at the top of the mulberry tree.
    At gate and courtyard--no murmur of the World’s dust:
    In the empty rooms--leisure and deep stillness.
    Long I lived checked by the bars of a cage:
    Now I have turned again to Nature and Freedom.


(10)

READING THE BOOK OF HILLS AND SEAS

    In the month of June the grass grows high
    And round my cottage thick-leaved branches sway.
    There is not a bird but delights in the place where it rests:
    And I too--love my thatched cottage.
    I have done my ploughing:
    I have sown my seed.
    Again I have time to sit and read my books.
    In the narrow lane there are no deep ruts:
    Often my friends’ carriages turn back.
    In high spirits I pour out my spring wine
    And pluck the lettuce growing in my garden.
    A gentle rain comes stealing up from the east
    And a sweet wind bears it company.
    My thoughts float idly over the story of King Chou
    My eyes wander over the pictures of Hills and Seas.
    At a single glance I survey the whole Universe.
    He will never be happy, whom such pleasures fail to please!


(11)

FLOOD

    The lingering clouds, rolling, rolling,
    And the settled rain, dripping, dripping,
    In the Eight Directions--the same dusk.
    The level lands--one great river.
    Wine I have, wine I have:
    Idly I drink at the eastern window.
    Longingly--I think of my friends,
    But neither boat nor carriage comes.


(12)

NEW CORN

    Swiftly the years, beyond recall.
    Solemn the stillness of this fair morning.
    I will clothe myself in spring-clothing
    And visit the slopes of the Eastern Hill.
    By the mountain-stream a mist hovers,
    Hovers a moment, then scatters.
    There comes a wind blowing from the south
    That brushes the fields of new corn.




CHAPTER IV


INVITING GUESTS

By Ch’ēng-kung Sui (died A.D. 273)

    I sent out invitations
    To summon guests.
    I collected together
    All my friends.
    Loud talk
    And simple feasting:
    Discussion of philosophy,
    Investigation of subtleties.
    Tongues loosened
    And minds at one.
    Hearts refreshed
    By discharge of emotion!


CLIMBING A MOUNTAIN

By Tao-yün (_circa_ A.D. 400), wife of General Wang Ning-chih. The
general was so stupid that she finally deserted him.

    High rises the Eastern Peak
    Soaring up to the blue sky.
    Among the rocks--an empty hollow,
    Secret, still, mysterious!
    Uncarved and unhewn,
    Screened by nature with a roof of clouds.
    Times and Seasons, what things are you
    Bringing to my life ceaseless change?
    I will lodge for ever in this hollow
    Where Springs and Autumns unheeded pass.


SAILING HOMEWARD

By Chan Fang-shēng (fourth century A.D.)

    Cliffs that rise a thousand feet
    Without a break,
    Lake that stretches a hundred miles
    Without a wave,
    Sands that are white through all the year,
    Without a stain,
    Pine-tree woods, winter and summer
    Ever-green,
    Streams that for ever flow and flow
    Without a pause,
    Trees that for twenty thousand years
    Your vows have kept,
    You have suddenly healed the pain of a traveller’s heart,
    And moved his brush to write a new song.


FIVE “TZŬ-YEH” SONGS

    At the time when blossoms
    Fall from the cherry-tree:
    On a day when yellow birds
    Hovered in the branches--
    You said you must stop,
    Because your horse was tired:
    I said I must go,
    Because my silkworms were hungry.

    All night I could not sleep
    Because of the moonlight on my bed.
    I kept on hearing a voice calling:
    Out of Nowhere, Nothing answered “yes.”

    I will carry my coat and not put on my belt;
    With unpainted eyebrows I will stand at the front window.
    My tiresome petticoat keeps on flapping about;
    If it opens a little, I shall blame the spring wind.

    I heard my love was going to Yang-chou
    And went with him as far as Ch’u-shan.
    For a moment when you held me fast in your outstretched arms
    I thought the river stood still and did not flow.

    I have brought my pillow and am lying at the northern window,
    So come to me and play with me awhile.
    With so much quarrelling and so few kisses
    How long do you think our love can last?


THE LITTLE LADY OF CH’ING-HSI

(A CHILDREN’S SONG)

    Her door opened on the white water
    Close by the side of the timber bridge:
    That’s where the little lady lived
    All alone without a lover.


PLUCKING THE RUSHES

(A BOY AND GIRL ARE SENT TO GATHER RUSHES FOR THATCHING)

Anon. (fourth century)

    Green rushes with red shoots,
    Long leaves bending to the wind--
    You and I in the same boat
    Plucking rushes at the Five Lakes.
    We started at dawn from the orchid-island:
    We rested under the elms till noon.
    You and I plucking rushes
    Had not plucked a handful when night came!


BALLAD OF THE WESTERN ISLAND IN THE NORTH COUNTRY

    “Seeing the plum-tree I thought of the Western Island
    And I plucked a branch to send to the North Country.
    I put on my dress of apricot-yellow silk
    And bound up my hair black as the crow’s wing.
    But which is the road that leads to the Western Island?
    I’ll ask the man at the ferry by the Bridge of Boats.
    But the sun is sinking and the orioles flying home:
    And the wind is blowing and sighing in the walnut-tree.
    I’ll stand under the tree just beside the gate:
    I’ll stand by the door and show off my enamelled hair-pins.”
    She’s opened the gate, but her lover has not come:
    She’s gone out at the gate to pluck red lotus.
    As she plucks the lotus on the southern dyke in autumn,
    The lotus flowers stand higher than a man’s head.
    She bends down--and plays with the lotus seeds,
    The lotus seeds are green like the lake-water.
    She gathers the flowers and puts them into her gown--
    The lotus-bud that is red all through.
    She thinks of her lover, her lover that does not come:
    She looks up and sees the wild geese flying--
    The Western Island is full of wild geese.
    To look for her lover she climbs the Blue Tower.
    The tower is high: she looks, but cannot see:
    All day she leans on the balcony rails.
    The rail is twisted into a twelve-fold pattern.
    She lets fall her hand white like the colour of jade.
    She rolls up the awning, she sees the wide sky,
    And the sea-water waving its vacant blue.
    “The sea shall carry my dreams far away,
    So that you shall be sorry at last for my sorrow.
    If the South wind--only knew my thoughts
    It would blow my dreams till they got to the Western Island.”


SONG

By Tsang Chih (sixth century)

    I was brought up under the Stone Castle:
    My window opened on to the castle tower.
    In the castle were beautiful young men
    Who waved to me as they went in and out.


SONG OF THE MEN OF CHIN-LING

(MARCHING BACK INTO THE CAPITAL)

By Hsieh T’iao (fifth century A.D.)

    Chiang-nan is a glorious and beautiful land,
    And Chin-ling an exalted and kingly province!
    The green canals of the city stretch on and on
    And its high towers stretch up and up.
    Flying gables lean over the bridle-road:
    Drooping willows cover the Royal Aqueduct.
    Shrill flutes sing by the coach’s awning,
    And reiterated drums bang near its painted wheels.
    The names of the deserving shall be carved on the Cloud Terrace.[34]
    And for those who have done valiantly rich reward awaits.

[34] The Record Office.


THE SCHOLAR RECRUIT

By Pao Chao (died A.D. 466)

    Now late
    I follow Time’s Necessity:[35]
    Mounting a barricade I pacify remote tribes.
    Discarding my sash I don a coat of rhinoceros-skin:
    Rolling up my skirts I shoulder a black bow.
    Even at the very start my strength fails:
    What will become of me before it’s all over?

[35] _I.e._, “enlist.”


THE RED HILLS

By Pao Chao

    Red hills lie athwart us as a menace in the west,
    And fiery mountains glare terrible in the south.
    The body burns, the head aches and throbs:
    If a bird light here, its soul forthwith departs.
    Warm springs
    Pour from cloudy pools
    And hot smoke issues between the rocks.
    The sun and moon are perpetually obscured:
    The rain and dew never stay dry.
    There are red serpents a hundred feet long,
    And black snakes ten girths round.
    The sand-spitters shoot their poison at the sunbeams:
    The flying insects are ill with the shifting glare.
    The hungry monkeys dare not come down to eat:
    The morning birds dare not set out to fly.
    At the Ching river many die of poison:
    Crossing the Lu one is lucky if one is only ill.
    Our living feet walk on dead ground:
    Our high wills surmount the snares of Fate.
    The Spear-boat General[36] got but little honour:
    The Wave-subduer[37] met with scant reward.
    If our Prince still grudges the things that are easy to give,[38]
    Can he hope that his soldiers will give what is hardest to give?[39]

[36] Hou Yen (first century B.C.).

[37] Ma Yüan (first century A.D.).

[38] Rewards and titles.

[39] Life.


DREAMING OF A DEAD LADY

    “I heard at night your long sighs
    And knew that you were thinking of me.”
    As she spoke, the doors of Heaven opened
    And our souls conversed and I saw her face.
    She set me a pillow to rest on
    And she brought me meat and drink.

           *       *       *       *       *

    I stood beside her where she lay,
    But suddenly woke and she was not there:
    And none knew how my soul was torn,
    How the tears fell surging over my breast.


THE LIBERATOR

A POLITICAL ALLEGORY

By Wu-ti, emperor of the Liang dynasty (A.D. 464-549)

    In the high trees--many doleful winds:
    The ocean waters--lashed into waves.
    If the sharp sword be not in your hand,
    How can you hope your friends will remain many?
    Do you not see that sparrow on the fence?
    Seeing the hawk it casts itself into the snare.
    The fowler to catch the sparrow is delighted:
    The Young Man to see the sparrow is grieved.
    He takes his sword and cuts through the netting:
    The yellow sparrow flies away, away.
    Away, away, up to the blue sky
    And down again to thank the Young Man.


LO-YANG

By the Emperor Ch’ien Wēn-ti (sixth century)

    A beautiful place is the town of Lo-yang:
    The big streets are full of spring light.
    The lads go driving out with harps in their hands:
    The mulberry girls go out to the fields with their baskets.
    Golden whips glint at the horses’ flanks.
    Gauze sleeves brush the green boughs.
    Racing dawn, the carriages come home,--
    And the girls with their high baskets full of fruit.


WINTER NIGHT

    My bed is so empty that I keep on waking up:
    As the cold increases, the night-wind begins to blow.
    It rustles the curtains, making a noise like the sea:
    Oh that those were waves which could carry me back to you!


THE REJECTED WIFE

By Yüan-ti (508-554). See page 15.

    Entering the Hall, she meets the new wife:
    Leaving the gate, she runs into her former husband.
    Words stick: she does not manage to say anything:
    She presses her hands together and hesitates.
    Agitates moon-like fan--sheds pearl-like tears--
    Realizes she loves him just as much as ever:
    That her present pain will never come to an end.


PEOPLE HIDE THEIR LOVE

By Wu-ti

    Who says
    That it’s by my desire,
    This separation, this living so far from you?
    My dress still smells of the lavender you gave:
    My hand still holds the letter that you sent.
    Round my waist I wear a double sash:
    I dream that it binds us both with a same-heart knot.
    Did not you know that people hide their love,
    Like a flower that seems too precious to be picked?


THE FERRY

By the Emperor Ch’ien Wēn-ti, of the Liang dynasty, who reigned
during the year A.D. 500.

    Of marsh-mallows my boat is made,
    The ropes are lily-roots.
    The pole-star is athwart the sky:
    The moon sinks low.
    It’s at the ferry I’m plucking lilies.
    But it might be the Yellow River--
    So afraid you seem of the wind and waves,
    So long you tarry at the crossing.[40]

[40] A lady is waiting for her lover at the ferry which crosses a small
stream. When he does not come, she bitterly suggests that he is as
afraid of the little stream as though it were the Yellow River, the
largest river in China.


THE WATERS OF LUNG-T’OU

(THE NORTH-WEST FRONTIER)

By Hsü Ling (A.D. 507-583)

    The road that I came by mounts eight thousand feet:
    The river that I crossed hangs a hundred fathoms.
    The brambles so thick that in summer one cannot pass!
    The snow so high that in winter one cannot climb!
    With branches that interlace Lung Valley is dark:
    Against cliffs that tower one’s voice beats and echoes.
    I turn my head, and it seems only a dream
    That I ever lived in the streets of Hsien-yang.


FLOWERS AND MOONLIGHT ON THE SPRING RIVER

By Yang-ti (605-617), emperor of the Sui dynasty

    The evening river is level and motionless--
    The spring colours just open to their full.
    Suddenly a wave carries the moon[41] away
    And the tidal water comes with its freight of stars.[41]

[41] _I.e._, the reflection in the water.


TCHIREK SONG

Altun (486-566 A.D.) was a Tartar employed by the Chinese in
drilling their troops “after the manner of the Huns.” He could not
read or write. The “Yo Fu Kuang T’i” says: Kao Huan attacked Pi,
king of Chou, but lost nearly half his men. Kao Huan fell ill of
sadness and Pi, to taunt him, sent out a proclamation, which said:

  Kao Huan, that son of a mouse
  Dared to attack King Pi.
  But at the first stroke of sword and bow,
  The aggressor’s plot recoiled on himself.

When this reached Kao Huan’s ears, he sat up in bed and tried to
comfort his officers. All the nobles were summoned to his room, and
Altun was asked to sing them a song about Tchirek, his native land.
He sang:

    Tchirek River
    Lies under the Dark Mountains:
    Where the sky is like the sides of a tent
    Stretched down over the Great Steppe.
    The sky is gray, gray:
    And the steppe wide, wide:
    Over grass that the wind has battered low
    Sheep and oxen roam.

“Altun” means “gold” in Tartar. No one could teach him to write the
Chinese character for _gold_, till at last some one said: “Draw the
roof of your house and then put a few strokes underneath.” He thus
learnt, in a rough fashion, to write his own name.




CHAPTER V


BUSINESS MEN

By Ch’ēn Tzŭ-ang (A.D. 656-698)

    Business men boast of their skill and cunning
    But in philosophy they are like little children.
    Bragging to each other of successful depredations
    They neglect to consider the ultimate fate of the body.
    What should they know of the Master of Dark Truth
    Who saw the wide world in a jade cup,
    By illumined conception got clear of Heaven and Earth:
    On the chariot of Mutation entered the Gate of Immutability?


TELL ME NOW

By Wang Chi (_circa_ A.D. 700)

    “Tell me now, what should a man want
    But to sit alone, sipping his cup of wine?”
    I should like to have visitors come and discuss philosophy
    And not to have the tax-collector coming to collect taxes:
    My three sons married into good families
    And my five daughters wedded to steady husbands.
    Then I could jog through a happy five-score years
    And, at the end, need no Paradise.


ON GOING TO A TAVERN

By Wang Chi

    These days, continually fuddled with drink,
    I fail to satisfy the appetites of the soul.
    But seeing men all behaving like drunkards,[42]
    How can I alone remain sober?

[42] Written during the war which preceded the T’ang dynasty.


STONE FISH LAKE

By Yüan Chieh (flourished _circa_ A.D. 740-770).

    Yüan Chieh, a contemporary of Li Po, has not hitherto been mentioned
    in any European book. “His subjects were always original, but his
    poems are seldom worth quoting,” is a Chinese opinion of him.

    I loved you dearly, Stone Fish Lake,
    With your rock-island shaped like a swimming fish!
    On the fish’s back is the Wine-cup Hollow
    And round the fish,--the flowing waters of the Lake.
    The boys on the shore sent little wooden ships,
    Each made to carry a single cup of wine.
    The island-drinkers emptied the liquor-boats
    And set their sails and sent them back for more.
    On the shores of the Lake were jutting slabs of rock
    And under the rocks there flowed an icy stream.
    Heated with wine, to rinse our mouths and hands
    In those cold waters was a joy beyond compare!

           *       *       *       *       *

    Of gold and jewels I have not any need;
    For Caps and Coaches I do not care at all.
    But I wish I could sit on the rocky banks of the Lake
    For ever and ever staring at the Stone Fish.


CIVILIZATION

By Yüan Chieh

    To the south-east--three thousand leagues--
    The Yüan and Hsiang form into a mighty lake.
    Above the lake are deep mountain valleys,
    And men dwelling whose hearts are without guile.
    Gay like children, they swarm to the tops of the trees;
    And run to the water to catch bream and trout.
    Their pleasures are the same as those of beasts and birds;
    They put no restraint either on body or mind.
    Far I have wandered throughout the Nine Lands;
    Wherever I went such manners had disappeared.
    I find myself standing and wondering, perplexed,
    Whether Saints and Sages have really done us good.


A PROTEST IN THE SIXTH YEAR OF CH’IEN FU (A.D. 879)

By Ts’ao Sung (flourished _circa_ A.D. 870-920)

    The hills and rivers of the lowland country
      You have made your battle-ground.
    How do you suppose the people who live there
      Will procure “firewood and hay”?[43]
    Do not let me hear you talking together
      About titles and promotions;
    For a single general’s reputation
      Is made out of ten thousand corpses.

[43] The necessaries of life.


ON THE BIRTH OF HIS SON

By Su Tung-p’o (A.D. 1036-1101)

    Families, when a child is born
    Want it to be intelligent.
    I, through intelligence,
    Having wrecked my whole life,
    Only hope the baby will prove
    Ignorant and stupid.
    Then he will crown a tranquil life
    By becoming a Cabinet Minister.


THE PEDLAR OF SPELLS

By Lu Yu (A.D. 1125-1209)

    An old man selling charms in a cranny of the town wall.
    He writes out spells to bless the silkworms and spells to protect
        the corn.
    With the money he gets each day he only buys wine.
    But he does not worry when his legs get wobbly,
    For he has a boy to lean on.


BOATING IN AUTUMN

By Lu Yu

    Away and away I sail in my light boat;
    My heart leaps with a great gust of joy.
    Through the leafless branches I see the temple in the wood;
    Over the dwindling stream the stone bridge towers.
    Down the grassy lanes sheep and oxen pass;
    In the misty village cranes and magpies cry.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Back in my home I drink a cup of wine
    And need not fear the greed[44] of the evening wind.

[44] Which “eats” men.


THE HERD-BOY

By Lu Yu

    In the southern village the boy who minds the ox
    With his naked feet stands on the ox’s back.
    Through the hole in his coat the river wind blows;
    Through his broken hat the mountain rain pours.
    On the long dyke he seemed to be far away;
    In the narrow lane suddenly we were face to face.

           *       *       *       *       *

    The boy is home and the ox is back in its stall;
    And a dark smoke oozes through the thatched roof.


HOW I SAILED ON THE LAKE TILL I CAME TO THE EASTERN STREAM

By Lu Yu

    Of Spring water,--thirty or forty miles:
    In the evening sunlight,--three or four houses.
    Youths and boys minding geese and ducks:
    Women and girls tending mulberries and hemp.
    The place,--remote: their coats and scarves old:
    The year,--fruitful: their talk and laughter gay.
    The old wanderer moors his flat boat
    And staggers up the bank to pluck wistaria flowers.


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY CHINESE POEM

Ch’ēn Tzŭ-lung was born in 1607. He became a soldier, and in 1637
defeated the rebel, Hsü Tu. After the suicide of the last Ming
emperor, he offered his services to the Ming princes who were still
opposing the Manchus. In 1647 he headed a conspiracy to place the
Ming prince Lu on the throne. His plans were discovered and he was
arrested by Manchu troops. Escaping their vigilance for a moment, he
leapt into a river and was drowned.

The following song describes the flight of a husband and wife from a
town menaced by the advancing Manchus. They find the whole
country-side deserted.


THE LITTLE CART

    The little cart jolting and banging through the yellow haze of dusk.
      The man pushing behind: the woman pulling in front.
    They have left the city and do not know where to go.
    “Green, green, those elm-tree leaves: _they_ will cure my hunger,
    If only we could find some quiet place and sup on them together.”

      The wind has flattened the yellow mother-wort:
      Above it in the distance they see the walls of a house.
      “_There_ surely must be people living who’ll give you something
        to eat.”
    They tap at the door, but no one comes: they look in, but the
        kitchen is empty.
    They stand hesitating in the lonely road and their tears fall
        like rain.




PART II

PO CHÜ-I

(A.D. 772-846)




INTRODUCTION


Po Chü-i was born at T’ai-yüan in Shansi. Most of his childhood was
spent at Jung-yang in Honan. His father was a second-class Assistant
Department Magistrate. He tells us that his family was poor and often in
difficulties.

He seems to have settled permanently at Ch’ang-an in 801. This town,
lying near the north-west frontier, was the political capital of the
Empire. In its situation it somewhat resembled Madrid. Lo-yang, the
Eastern city, owing to its milder climate and more accessible position,
became, like Seville in Spain, a kind of _social_ capital.

Soon afterwards he met Yüan Chēn, then aged twenty-two, who was destined
to play so important a part in his life. Five years later, during a
temporary absence from the city, he addressed to Yüan the following
poem:

    Since I left my home to seek official state
    Seven years I have lived in Ch’ang-an.
    What have I gained? Only you, Yüan;
    So hard it is to bind friendships fast.
    We have roamed on horseback under the flowering trees;
    We have walked in the snow and warmed our hearts with wine.
        We have met and parted at the Western Gate
    And neither of us bothered to put on Cap or Belt.
    We did not go up together for Examination;
    We were not serving in the same Department of State.
    The bond that joined us lay deeper than outward things;
    The rivers of our souls spring from the same well!

Of Yüan’s appearance at this time we may guess something from a picture
which still survives in copy; it shows him, a youthful and elegant
figure, visiting his cousin Ts’ui Ying-ying, who was a lady-in-waiting
at Court.[45] At this period of his life Po made friends with
difficulty, not being, as he tells us, “a master of such accomplishments
as caligraphy, painting, chess or gambling, which tend to bring men
together in pleasurable intercourse.” Two older men, T’ang Ch’ü and Tēng
Fang, liked his poetry and showed him much kindness; another, the
politician K’ung T’an, won his admiration on public grounds. But all
three died soon after he got to know them. Later he made three friends
with whom he maintained a lifelong intimacy: the poet Liu Yū-hsi (called
Mēng-tē), and the two officials Li Chien and Ts’ui Hsuan-liang. In 805
Yüan Chēn was banished for provocative behaviour towards a high
official. The T’ang History relates the episode as follows: “Yüan was
staying the night at the Fu-shui Inn; just as he was preparing to go to
sleep in the Main Hall, the court-official Li Shih-yüan also arrived.
Yüan Chēn should have offered to withdraw from the Hall. He did not do
so and a scuffle ensued. Yüan, locked out of the building, took off his
shoes and stole round to the back, hoping to find another way in. Liu
followed with a whip and struck him across the face.”

[45] Yüan has told the story of this intrigue in an autobiographical
fragment, of which I hope to publish a translation. Upon this fragment
is founded the famous fourteenth-century drama, “The Western Pavilion.”

The separation was a heavy blow to Po Chü-i. In a poem called “Climbing
Alone to the Lo-yu Gardens” he says:

    I look down on the Twelve City Streets:--
    Red dust flanked by green trees!
    Coaches and horsemen alone fill my eyes;
    I do not see whom my heart longs to see.
    K’ung T’an has died at Lo-yang;
    Yüan Chēn is banished to Ching-mēn.
    Of all that walk on the North-South Road
    There is not one that I care for more than the rest!

In 804 on the death of his father, and again in 811 on the death of his
mother, he spent periods of retirement on the Wei river near Ch’ang-an.
It was during the second of these periods that he wrote the long poem
(260 lines) called “Visiting the Wu-chēn Temple.” Soon after his return
to Ch’ang-an, which took place in the winter of 814, he fell into
official disfavour. In two long memorials entitled “On Stopping the
War,” he had criticized the handling of a campaign against an
unimportant tribe of Tartars, which he considered had been unduly
prolonged. In a series of poems he had satirized the rapacity of minor
officials and called attention to the intolerable sufferings of the
masses.

His enemies soon found an opportunity of silencing him. In 814 the Prime
Minister, Wu Yüan-hēng, was assassinated in broad daylight by an agent
of the revolutionary leader Wu Yüan-chi. Po, in a memorial to the
Throne, pointed out the urgency of remedying the prevailing discontent.
He held at this time the post of assistant secretary to the Princes’
tutor. He should not have criticized the Prime Minister (for being
murdered!) until the official Censors had spoken, for he held a Palace
appointment which did not carry with it the right of censorship.

His opponents also raked up another charge. His mother had met her death
by falling into a well while looking at flowers. Chü-i had written two
poems entitled “In Praise of Flowers” and “The New Well.” It was
claimed that by choosing such subjects he had infringed the laws of
Filial Piety.

He was banished to Kiukiang (then called Hsün-yang) with the rank of
Sub-Prefect. After three years he was given the Governorship of
Chung-chou, a remote place in Ssech’uan. On the way up the Yangtze he
met Yüan Chēn after three years of separation. They spent a few days
together at I-ch’ang, exploring the rock-caves of the neighbourhood.

Chung-chou is noted for its “many flowers and exotic trees,” which were
a constant delight to its new Governor. In the winter of 819 he was
recalled to the capital and became a second-class Assistant Secretary.
About this time Yüan Chēn also returned to the city.

In 821 the Emperor Mou Tsung came to the throne. His arbitrary
mis-government soon caused a fresh rising in the north-west. Chü-i
remonstrated in a series of memorials and was again removed from the
capital--this time to be Governor of the important town of Hangchow.
Yüan now held a judicial post at Ningpo and the two were occasionally
able to meet.

In 824 his Governorship expired and he lived (with the nominal rank of
Imperial Tutor) at the village of Li-tao-li, near Lo-yang. It was here
that he took into his household two girls, Fan-su and Man-tzŭ, whose
singing and dancing enlivened his retreat. He also brought with him from
Hangchow a famous “Indian rock,” and two cranes of the celebrated
“Hua-t’ing” breed. Other amenities of his life at this time were a
recipe for making sweet wine, the gift of Ch’ēn Hao-hsien; a harp-melody
taught him by Ts’ui Hsuan-liang; and a song called “Autumn Thoughts,”
brought by the concubine of a visitor from Ssech’uan.

In 825 he became Governor of Soochow. Here at the age of fifty-three he
enjoyed a kind of second youth, much more sociable than that of thirty
years before; we find him endlessly picnicking and feasting. But after
two years illness obliged him to retire.

He next held various posts at the capital, but again fell ill, and in
829 settled at Lo-yang as Governor of the Province of Honan. Here his
first son, A-ts’ui, was born, but died in the following year.

In 831 Yüan Chēn also died.

Henceforth, though for thirteen years he continued to hold nominal
posts, he lived a life of retirement. In 832 he repaired an unoccupied
part of the Hsiang-shan monastery at Lung-mēn,[46] a few miles south of
Lo-yang, and lived there, calling himself the Hermit of Hsiang-shan.
Once he invited to dinner eight other elderly and retired officials; the
occasion was recorded in a picture entitled “The Nine Old Men at
Hsiang-shan.” There is no evidence that his association with them was
otherwise than transient, though legend (see “Mémoires Concernant les
Chinois” and Giles, Biographical Dictionary) has invested the incident
with an undue importance. He amused himself at this time by writing a
description of his daily life which would be more interesting if it were
not so closely modelled on a famous memoir by T’ao Ch’ien. In the winter
of 839 he was attacked by paralysis and lost the use of his left leg.
After many months in bed he was again able to visit his garden, carried
by Ju-man, a favourite monk.

[46] Famous for its rock-sculptures, carved in the sixth and seventh
centuries.

In 842 Liu Yü-hsi, the last survivor of the four friends, and a constant
visitor at the monastery, “went to wander with Yüan Chēn in Hades.” The
monk Ju-man also died.

The remaining years of Po’s life were spent in collecting and arranging
his Complete Works. Copies were presented to the principal monasteries
(the “Public Libraries” of the period) in the towns with which he had
been connected. He died in 846, leaving instructions that his funeral
should be without pomp and that he should be buried not in the family
tomb at Hsia-kuei, but by Ju-man’s side in the Hsiang-shan Monastery. He
desired that a posthumous title should not be awarded.

The most striking characteristic of Po Chü-i’s poetry is its verbal
simplicity. There is a story that he was in the habit of reading his
poems to an old peasant woman and altering any expression which she
could not understand. The poems of his contemporaries were mere elegant
diversions which enabled the scholar to display his erudition, or the
literary juggler his dexterity. Po expounded his theory of poetry in a
letter to Yüan Chēn. Like Confucius, he regarded art solely as a method
of conveying instruction. He is not the only great artist who has
advanced this untenable theory. He accordingly valued his didactic poems
far above his other work; but it is obvious that much of his best poetry
conveys no moral whatever. He admits, indeed, that among his
“miscellaneous stanzas” many were inspired by some momentary sensation
or passing event. “A single laugh or a single sigh were rapidly
translated into verse.”

The didactic poems or “satires” belong to the period before his first
banishment. “When the tyrants and favourites heard my Songs of Ch’in,
they looked at one another and changed countenance,” he boasts. Satire,
in the European sense, implies _wit_; but Po’s satires are as lacking in
true wit as they are unquestionably full of true poetry. We must regard
them simply as moral tales in verse.

In the conventional lyric poetry of his predecessors he finds little to
admire. Among the earlier poems of the T’ang dynasty he selects for
praise the series by Ch’ēn Tzŭ-ang, which includes “Business Men.” In Li
Po and Tu Fu he finds a deficiency of “fēng” and “ya.” The two terms are
borrowed from the Preface to the Odes. “Fēng” means “criticism of one’s
rulers”; “ya,” “moral guidance to the masses.”

“The skill,” he says in the same letter, “which Tu Fu shows in threading
on to his _lü-shih_ a ramification of allusions ancient and modern could
not be surpassed; in this he is even superior to Li Po. But, if we take
the ‘Press-gang’ and verses like that stanza:

    At the palace doors the smell of meat and wine;
    On the road the bones of one who was frozen to death.

what a small part of his whole work it represents!”

Content, in short, he valued far above form: and it was part of his
theory, though certainly not of his practice, that this content ought to
be definitely moral. He aimed at raising poetry from the triviality into
which it had sunk and restoring it to its proper intellectual level. It
is an irony that he should be chiefly known to posterity, in China,
Japan, and the West, as the author of the “Everlasting Wrong.”[47] He
set little store by the poem himself, and, though a certain political
moral might be read into it, its appeal is clearly romantic.

[47] Giles, “Chinese Literature,” p. 169.

His other poem of sentiment, the “Lute Girl,”[48] accords even less with
his stated principles. With these he ranks his _Lü-shih_; and it should
here be noted that all the satires and long poems are in the old style
of versification, while his lighter poems are in the strict, modern
form. With his satires he classes his “reflective” poems, such as
“Singing in the Mountains,” “On being removed from Hsün-yang,” “Pruning
Trees,” etc. These are all in the old style.

[48] Giles, “Chinese Literature,” p. 165.

No poet in the world can ever have enjoyed greater contemporary
popularity than Po. His poems were “on the mouths of kings, princes,
concubines, ladies, plough-boys, and grooms.” They were inscribed “on
the walls of village-schools, temples, and ships-cabins.” “A certain
Captain Kao Hsia-yü was courting a dancing-girl. ‘You must not think I
am an ordinary dancing-girl,’ she said to him, ‘I can recite Master Po’s
“Everlasting Wrong.”’ And she put up her price.”

But this popularity was confined to the long, romantic poems and the
_Lü-shih_. “The world,” writes Po to Yüan Chēn, “values highest just
those of my poems which I most despise. Of contemporaries you alone have
understood my satires and reflective poems. A hundred, a thousand years
hence perhaps some one will come who will understand them as you have
done.”

The popularity of his lighter poems lasted till the Ming dynasty, when a
wave of pedantry swept over China. At that period his poetry was
considered vulgar, because it was not erudite; and prosaic, because it
was not rhetorical.

Although they valued form far above content, not even the Ming critics
can accuse him of slovenly writing. His versification is admitted by
them to be “correct.”

Caring, indeed, more for matter than for manner, he used with facility
and precision the technical instruments which were at his disposal. Many
of the later anthologies omit his name altogether, but he has always had
isolated admirers. Yüan Mei imitates him constantly, and Chao I (died
1814) writes: “Those who accuse him of being vulgar and prosaic know
nothing of poetry.”

Even during his lifetime his reputation had reached Japan, and great
writers like Michizane were not ashamed to borrow from him. He is still
held in high repute there, is the subject of a Nō Play and has even
become a kind of Shintō deity. It is significant that the only copy of
his works in the British Museum is a seventeenth-century Japanese
edition.

It is usual to close a biographical notice with an attempt to describe
the “character” of one’s subject. But I hold myself absolved from such a
task; for the sixty poems which follow will enable the reader to perform
it for himself.




AN EARLY LEVÉE

ADDRESSED TO CH’ĒN, THE HERMIT

    At Ch’ang-an--a full foot of snow;
    A levée at dawn--to bestow congratulations on the Emperor.
    Just as I was nearing the Gate of the Silver Terrace,
    After I had left the suburb of Hsin-ch’ang
    On the high causeway my horse’s foot slipped;
    In the middle of the journey my lantern suddenly went out.
    Ten leagues riding, always facing to the North;
    The cold wind almost blew off my ears.
    I waited for the bell outside the Five Gates;
    I waited for the summons within the Triple Hall.
    My hair and beard were frozen and covered with icicles;
    My coat and robe--chilly like water.
    Suddenly I thought of Hsien-yu Valley
    And secretly envied Ch’ēn Chü-shih,
    In warm bed-socks dozing beneath the rugs
    And not getting up till the sun has mounted the sky.


BEING ON DUTY ALL NIGHT IN THE PALACE AND DREAMING OF THE HSIEN-YU
TEMPLE

    At the western window I paused from writing rescripts;
    The pines and bamboos were all buried in stillness.
    The moon rose and a calm wind came;
    Suddenly, it was like an evening in the hills.
    And so, as I dozed, I dreamed of the South West
    And thought I was staying at the Hsien-yu Temple.[49]
    When I woke and heard the dripping of the Palace clock
    I still thought it the murmur of a mountain stream.

[49] Where the poet used to spend his holidays.


PASSING T’IEN-MĒN STREET IN CH’ANG-AN AND SEEING A DISTANT VIEW OF
CHUNG-NAN[50] MOUNTAIN

    The snow has gone from Chung-nan; spring is almost come.
    Lovely in the distance its blue colours, against the brown of the
        streets.
    A thousand coaches, ten thousand horsemen pass down the Nine Roads;
    Turns his head and looks at the mountains,--not one man!

[50] Part of the great Nan Shan range, fifteen miles south of Ch’ang-an.


THE LETTER

_Preface_:--After I parted with Yüan Chēn, I suddenly dreamt one night
that I saw him. When I awoke, I found that a letter from him had just
arrived and, enclosed in it, a poem on the _paulovnia_ flower.

    We talked together in the Yung-shou Temple;
    We parted to the north of the Hsin-ch’ang dyke.
    Going home--I shed a few tears,
    Grieving about things,--not sorry for you.
    Long, long the road to Lan-t’ien;
    You said yourself you would not be able to write.
    Reckoning up your halts for eating and sleeping--
    By this time you’ve crossed the Shang mountains.
    Last night the clouds scattered away;
    A thousand leagues, the same moonlight scene.
    When dawn came, I dreamt I saw your face;
    It must have been that you were thinking of me.
    In my dream, I thought I held your hand
    And asked you to tell me what your thoughts were.
    And _you_ said: “I miss you bitterly,
    But there’s no one here to send to you with a letter.”
    When I awoke, before I had time to speak,
    A knocking on the door sounded “Doong, doong!”
    They came and told me a messenger from Shang-chou
    Had brought a letter,--a single scroll from you!
    Up from my pillow I suddenly sprang out of bed,
    And threw you my clothes, all topsy-turvy.
    I undid the knot and saw the letter within;
    A single sheet with thirteen lines of writing.
    At the top it told the sorrows of an exile’s heart;
    At the bottom it described the pains of separation.
    The sorrows and pains took up so much space
    There was no room left to talk about the weather!
      But you said that when you wrote
    You were staying for the night to the east of Shang-chou;
    Sitting alone, lighted by a solitary candle
    Lodging in the mountain hostel of Yang-Ch’ēng.
      Night was late when you finished writing,
    The mountain moon was slanting towards the west.
    What is it lies aslant across the moon?
    A single tree of purple _paulovnia_ flowers--
    Paulovnia flowers just on the point of falling
    Are a symbol to express “thinking of an absent friend.”
    Lovingly--you wrote on the back side,
    To send in the letter, your “Poem of the Paulovnia Flower.”
    The Poem of the Paulovnia Flower has eight rhymes;
    Yet these eight couplets have cast a spell on my heart.
    They have taken hold of this morning’s thoughts
    And carried them to yours, the night you wrote your letter.
    The whole poem I read three times;
    Each verse ten times I recite.
    So precious to me are the fourscore words
    That each letter changes into a bar of gold!


REJOICING AT THE ARRIVAL OF CH’ĒN HSIUNG

(_Circa_ A.D. 812)

    When the yellow bird’s note was almost stopped;
    And half formed the green plum’s fruit;
    Sitting and grieving that spring things were over,
    I rose and entered the Eastern Garden’s gate.
    I carried my cup and was dully drinking alone:
    Suddenly I heard a knocking sound at the door.
    Dwelling secluded, I was glad that someone had come;
    How much the more, when I saw it was Ch’ēn Hsiung!
    At ease and leisure,--all day we talked;
    Crowding and jostling,--the feelings of many years.
    How great a thing is a single cup of wine!
    For it makes us tell the story of our whole lives.


GOLDEN BELLS

                      When I was almost forty
    I had a daughter whose name was Golden Bells.
    Now it is just a year since she was born;
    She is learning to sit and cannot yet talk.
    Ashamed,--to find that I have not a sage’s heart:
    I cannot resist vulgar thoughts and feelings.
    Henceforward I am tied to things outside myself:
    My only reward,--the pleasure I am getting now.
    If I am spared the grief of her dying young,
    Then I shall have the trouble of getting her married.
    My plan for retiring and going back to the hills
    Must now be postponed for fifteen years!


REMEMBERING GOLDEN BELLS

    Ruined and ill,--a man of two score;
      Pretty and guileless,--a girl of three.
    Not a boy,--but, still better than nothing:
    To soothe one’s feeling,--from time to time a kiss!
    There came a day,--they suddenly took her from me;
    Her soul’s shadow wandered I know not where.
    And when I remember how just at the time she died
    She lisped strange sounds, beginning to learn to talk,
    _Then_ I know that the ties of flesh and blood
    Only bind us to a load of grief and sorrow.
    At last, by thinking of the time before she was born,
    By thought and reason I drove the pain away.
    Since my heart forgot her, many days have passed
    And three times winter has changed to spring.
    This morning, for a little, the old grief came back,
    Because, in the road, I met her foster-nurse.


ILLNESS

    Sad, sad--lean with long illness;
    Monotonous, monotonous--days and nights pass.
    The summer trees have clad themselves in shade;
    The autumn “lan”[51] already houses the dew.
    The eggs that lay in the nest when I took to bed
    Have changed into little birds and flown away.
    The worm that then lay hidden in its hole
    Has hatched into a cricket sitting on the tree.
    The Four Seasons go on for ever and ever:
    In all Nature nothing stops to rest
    Even for a moment. Only the sick man’s heart
    Deep down still aches as of old!

[51] The epidendrum.


THE DRAGON OF THE BLACK POOL

A SATIRE

    Deep the waters of the Black Pool, coloured like ink;
    They say a Holy Dragon lives there, whom men have never seen.
    Beside the Pool they have built a shrine; the authorities have
        established a ritual;
    A dragon by itself remains a dragon, but men can make it a god.
    Prosperity and disaster, rain and drought, plagues and pestilences--
    By the village people were all regarded as the Sacred Dragon’s
        doing.
    They all made offerings of sucking-pig and poured libations of wine;
    The morning prayers and evening gifts depended on a “medium’s”
        advice

                  When the dragon comes, ah!
                  The wind stirs and sighs
                  Paper money thrown, ah!
                  Silk umbrellas waved.
                  When the dragon goes, ah!
                  The wind also--still.
                  Incense-fire dies, ah!
                  The cups and vessels are cold.[52]

[52] Parody of a famous Han dynasty hymn.

    Meats lie stacked on the rocks of the Pool’s shore;
    Wine flows on the grass in front of the shrine.
    I do not know, of all those offerings, how much the Dragon eats;
    But the mice of the woods and the foxes of the hills are
        continually drunk and sated.
                  Why are the foxes so lucky?
                  What have the sucking-pigs done,
    That year by year _they_ should be killed, merely to glut the foxes?
    That the foxes are robbing the Sacred Dragon and eating His
        sucking-pig,
    Beneath the nine-fold depths of His pool, does He know or not?


THE GRAIN TRIBUTE

Written _circa_ 812, showing one of the poet’s periods of retirement.
When the officials come to receive his grain-tribute, he remembers that
he is only giving back what he had taken during his years of office.
Salaries were paid partly in kind.

    There came an officer knocking by night at my door--
    In a loud voice demanding grain-tribute.
    My house-servants dared not wait till the morning,
    But brought candles and set them on the barn-floor.
    Passed through the sieve, clean-washed as pearls,
    A whole cart-load, thirty bushels of grain.
    But still they cry that it is not paid in full:
    With whips and curses they goad my servants and boys.
    Once, in error, I entered public life;
    I am inwardly ashamed that my talents were not sufficient.
    In succession I occupied four official posts;
    For doing nothing,--ten years’ salary!
    Often have I heard that saying of ancient men
    That “good and ill follow in an endless chain.”
    And to-day it ought to set my heart at rest
    To return to others the corn in my great barn.


THE PEOPLE OF TAO-CHOU

                In the land of Tao-chou
                Many of the people are dwarfs;
    The tallest of them never grow to more than three feet.
    They were sold in the market as dwarf slaves and yearly sent to
        Court;
    Described as “an offering of natural products from the land of
        Tao-chou.”
    A strange “offering of natural products”; I never heard of one yet
    That parted men from those they loved, never to meet again!
    Old men--weeping for their grandsons; mothers for their children!
    One day--Yang Ch’ēng came to govern the land;
    He refused to send up dwarf slaves in spite of incessant mandates.
    He replied to the Emperor “Your servant finds in the Six Canonical
        Books
    ‘In offering products, one must offer what is there, and not what
        isn’t there’
    On the waters and lands of Tao-chou, among all the things that live
    I only find dwarfish _people_; no dwarfish _slaves_.”
    The Emperor’s heart was deeply moved and he sealed and sent a scroll
    “The yearly tribute of dwarfish slaves is henceforth annulled.”
                The people of Tao-chou,
    Old ones and young ones, how great their joy!
    Father with son and brother with brother henceforward kept together;
    From that day for ever more they lived as free men.
                The people of Tao-chou
                Still enjoy this gift.
    And even now when they speak of the Governor
    Tears start to their eyes.
    And lest their children and their children’s children should forget
        the Governor’s name,
    When boys are born the syllable “Yang” is often used in their
        forename.


THE OLD HARP

    Of cord and cassia-wood is the harp compounded:
    Within it lie ancient melodies.
    Ancient melodies--weak and savourless,
    Not appealing to present men’s taste.
    Light and colour are faded from the jade stops:
    Dust has covered the rose-red strings.
    Decay and ruin came to it long ago,
    But the sound that is left is still cold and clear.
    I do not refuse to play it, if you want me to:
    But even if I play, people will not listen.

           *       *       *       *       *

    How did it come to be neglected so?
    Because of the Ch’iang flute and the Ch’in flageolet.[53]

[53] Barbarous modern instruments.


THE HARPER OF CHAO

    The singers have hushed their notes of clear song:
    The red sleeves of the dancers are motionless.
    Hugging his lute, the old harper of Chao
    Rocks and sways as he touches the five chords.
    The loud notes swell and scatter abroad:
    “Sa, sa,” like wind blowing the rain.
    The soft notes dying almost to nothing:
    “Ch’ieh, ch’ieh,” like the voice of ghosts talking.
    Now as glad as the magpie’s lucky song:
    Again bitter as the gibbon’s ominous cry.
    His ten fingers have no fixed note:
    Up and down--“kung,” chih, and yü.[54]
    And those who sit and listen to the tune he plays
    Of soul and body lose the mastery.
    And those who pass that way as he plays the tune,
    Suddenly stop and cannot raise their feet.

    Alas, alas that the ears of common men
    Should love the modern and not love the old.
    Thus it is that the harp in the green window
    Day by day is covered deeper with dust.

[54] Tonic, dominant and superdominant of the ancient five-note scale.


THE FLOWER MARKET

    In the Royal City spring is almost over:
    Tinkle, tinkle--the coaches and horsemen pass.
    We tell each other “This is the peony season”:
    And follow with the crowd that goes to the Flower Market.
    “Cheap and dear--no uniform price:
    The cost of the plant depends on the number of blossoms.
    For the fine flower,--a hundred pieces of damask:
    For the cheap flower,--five bits of silk.
    Above is spread an awning to protect them:
    Around is woven a wattle-fence to screen them.
    If you sprinkle water and cover the roots with mud,
    When they are transplanted, they will not lose their beauty.”
    Each household thoughtlessly follows the custom,
    Man by man, no one realizing.
    There happened to be an old farm labourer
            Who came by chance that way.
    He bowed his head and sighed a deep sigh:
    But this sigh nobody understood.
    He was thinking, “A cluster of deep-red flowers
    Would pay the taxes of ten poor houses.”


THE PRISONER

Written in A.D. 809

                    Tartars led in chains,
                    Tartars led in chains!
    Their ears pierced, their faces bruised--they are driven into the
        land of Ch’in.
    The Son of Heaven took pity on them and would not have them slain.
    He sent them away to the south-east, to the lands of Wu and Yüeh.
    A petty officer in a yellow coat took down their names and surnames:
    They were led from the city of Ch’ang-an under escort of an armed
        guard.
    Their bodies were covered with the wounds of arrows, their bones
        stood out from their cheeks.
    They had grown so weak they could only march a single stage a day.
    In the morning they must satisfy hunger and thirst with neither
        plate nor cup:
    At night they must lie in their dirt and rags on beds that stank
        with filth.
    Suddenly they came to the Yangtze River and remembered the waters
        of Chiao.[55]
    With lowered hands and levelled voices they sobbed a muffled song.
    Then one Tartar lifted up his voice and spoke to the other Tartars,
    “_Your_ sorrows are none at all compared with _my_ sorrows.”
    Those that were with him in the same band asked to hear his tale:
      As he tried to speak the words were choked by anger.
    He told them “I was born and bred in the town of Liang-yüan.[56]
    In the frontier wars of Ta-li[57] I fell into the Tartars’ hands.
    Since the days the Tartars took me alive forty years have passed:
    They put me into a coat of skins tied with a belt of rope.
    Only on the first of the first month might I wear my Chinese dress.
    As I put on my coat and arranged my cap, how fast the tears flowed!
    I made in my heart a secret vow I would find a way home:
    I hid my plan from my Tartar wife and the children she had borne me
        in the land.
    I thought to myself, ‘It is well for me that my limbs are still
        strong,’
    And yet, being old, in my heart I feared I should never live to
        return.
    The Tartar chieftains shoot so well that the birds are afraid to fly:
    From the risk of their arrows I escaped alive and fled swiftly home.
    Hiding all day and walking all night, I crossed the Great Desert:[58]
    Where clouds are dark and the moon black and the sands eddy in the
        wind.
    Frightened, I sheltered at the Green Grave,[59] where the frozen
        grasses are few:
    Stealthily I crossed the Yellow River, at night, on the thin ice,
    Suddenly I heard Han[60] drums and the sound of soldiers coming:
    I went to meet them at the road-side, bowing to them as they came.
    But the moving horsemen did not hear that I spoke the Han tongue:
    Their Captain took me for a Tartar born and had me bound in chains.
    They are sending me away to the south-east, to a low and swampy
        land:
    No one now will take pity on me: resistance is all in vain.
    Thinking of this, my voice chokes and I ask of Heaven above,
    Was I spared from death only to spend the rest of my years in
        sorrow?
    My native village of Liang-yüan I shall not see again:
    My wife and children in the Tartars’ land I have fruitlessly
        deserted.
    When I fell among Tartars and was taken prisoner, I pined for the
        land of Han:
    Now that I am back in the land of Han, they have turned me into
        a Tartar.
    Had I but known what my fate would be, I would not have started
        home!
    For the two lands, so wide apart, are alike in the sorrow they
        bring.
                  Tartar prisoners in chains!
    Of all the sorrows of all the prisoners mine is the hardest to bear!
    Never in the world has so great a wrong befallen the lot of man,--
    A Han heart and a Han tongue set in the body of a Turk.”

[55] In Turkestan.

[56] North of Ch’ang-an.

[57] The period Ta-li, A.D. 766-780.

[58] The Gobi Desert.

[59] The grave of Chao-chün, a Chinese girl who in 33 B.C. was “bestowed
upon the Khan of the Hsiung-nu as a mark of Imperial regard” (Giles).
Hers was the only grave in this desolate district on which grass would
grow.

[60] _I.e._, Chinese.


THE CHANCELLOR’S GRAVEL-DRIVE

(A SATIRE ON THE MALTREATMENT OF SUBORDINATES)

    A Government-bull yoked to a Government-cart!
    Moored by the bank of Ch’an River, a barge loaded with gravel.
    A single load of gravel,
    How many pounds it weighs!
    Carrying at dawn, carrying at dusk, what is it all for?
    They are carrying it towards the Five Gates,
    To the West of the Main Road.
    Under the shadow of green laurels they are making a gravel-drive.
    For yesterday arrove, newly appointed,
    The Assistant Chancellor of the Realm,
    And was terribly afraid that the wet and mud
    Would dirty his horse’s hoofs.
    The Chancellor’s horse’s hoofs
    Stepped on the gravel and remained perfectly clean;
    But the bull employed in dragging the cart
    Was almost sweating blood.
    The Assistant Chancellor’s business
    Is to “save men, govern the country
    And harmonize Yin and Yang.”[61]
    Whether the bull’s neck is sore
    Need not trouble him at all.

[61] The negative and positive principles in nature.


THE MAN WHO DREAMED OF FAIRIES

This poem is an attack on the Emperor Hsien-tsung, A.D. 806-820, who
“was devoted to magic.” A Taoist wizard told him that herbs of longevity
grew near the city of T’ai-chou. The Emperor at once appointed him
prefect of the place, “pour lui permettre d’herboriser plus à son aise”
(Wieger, Textes III, 1723). When the censors protested, the Emperor
replied: “The ruin of a single district would be a small price to pay,
if it could procure longevity for the Lord of Men.”

    There was once a man who dreamt he went to Heaven:
    His dream-body soared aloft through space.
    He rode on the back of a white-plumed crane,
    And was led on his flight by two crimson banners.
    Whirring of wings and flapping of coat tails!
    Jade bells suddenly all a-tinkle!
    Half way to Heaven, he looked down beneath him,
    Down on the dark turmoil of the World.
    Gradually he lost the place of his native town;
    Mountains and water--nothing else distinct.
    The Eastern Ocean--a single strip of white:
    The Hills of China,--five specks of green.
    Gliding past him a host of fairies swept
    In long procession to the Palace of the Jade City.
    How should he guess that the children of Tzŭ-mēn[62]
    Bow to the throne like courtiers of earthly kings?
    They take him to the presence of the Mighty Jade Emperor:
    He bows his head and proffers loyal homage.
    The Emperor says: “We see you have fairy talents:
    Be of good heart and do not slight yourself.
    We shall send to fetch you in fifteen years
    And give you a place in the Courtyard of Immortality.”
    Twice bowing, he acknowledged the gracious words:
    Then woke from sleep, full of wonder and joy.
    He hid his secret and dared not tell it abroad:
    But vowed a vow he would live in a cave of rock.
    From love and affection he severed kith and kin:
    From his eating and drinking he omitted savoury and spice.
    His morning meal was a dish of coral-dust:
    At night he sipped an essence of dewy mists.
    In the empty mountains he lived for thirty years
    Daily watching for the Heavenly Coach to come.
    The time of appointment was already long past,
    But of wings and coach-bells--still no sound.
    His teeth and hair daily withered and decayed:
    His ears and eyes gradually lost their keenness.
    One morning he suffered the Common Change
    And his body was one with the dust and dirt of the hill.
    Gods and fairies! If indeed such things there be,
    Their ways are beyond the striving of mortal men.
    If you have not on your skull the Golden Bump’s protrusion,
    If your name is absent from the rolls of the Red Terrace,
    In vain you learn the “Method of Avoiding Food”:
    For naught you study the “Book of Alchemic Lore.”
    Though you sweat and toil, what shall your trouble bring?
    You will only shorten the five-score years of your span.
    Sad, alas, the man who dreamt of Fairies!
    For a single dream spoiled his whole life.

[62] _I.e._, the Immortals.


MAGIC

                  Boundless, the great sea.
    Straight down,--no bottom: sideways,--no border.
    Of cloudy waves and misty billows down in the uttermost depths
    Men have fabled, in the midst there stand three sacred hills.
    On the hills, thick growing,--herbs that banish Death.
    Wings grow on those who eat them and they turn into heavenly “hsien.”
    The Lord of Ch’in[63] and Wu of Han[64] believed in these stories:
    And magic-workers year by year were sent to gather the herbs.
    The Blessed Islands, now and of old, what but an empty tale?
    The misty waters spread before them and they knew not where to seek.
                  Boundless, the great sea.
                  Dauntless, the mighty wind.
    Their eyes search but cannot see the shores of the Blessed Islands.
    They cannot find the Blessed Isles and yet they dare not return:
    Youths and maidens that began the quest grew grey on board the boat.
    They found that the writings of Hsü[65] were all boasts and lies:
    To the Lofty Principle and Great Unity in vain they raised their
        prayers.
                  Do you not see
    The graves on the top of Black Horse Hill[66] and the tombs at
        Mo-ling?[67]
    What is left but the sighing wind blowing in the tangled grasses?
                  Yes, and what is more,
    The Dark and Primal Master of Sages in his five thousand words[68]
                  Never spoke of herbs,
                  Never spoke of “hsien,”
    Nor spoke of soaring in broad daylight up to the blue heaven.

[63] The “First Emperor,” 259-210 B.C.

[64] Wu Ti, 156-87 B.C.

[65] = Hsü Shih. Giles, 1276.

[66] The burial-places of these two Emperors.

[67] _Ibid._

[68] Lao-tzŭ, in the Tao Tē Ching.


THE TWO RED TOWERS

(A SATIRE AGAINST CLERICALISM)

    The Two Red Towers
    North and south rise facing each other.
    I beg to ask, to whom do they belong?
    To the two Princes of the period Chēng Yüan.[69]
    The two Princes blew on their flutes and drew down fairies from the
        sky,
    Who carried them off through the Five Clouds, soaring away to Heaven.
    Their halls and houses, that they could not take with them,
    Were turned into Temples planted in the Dust of the World.
    In the tiring-rooms and dancers’ towers all is silent and still;
    Only the willows like dancers’ arms, and the pond like a mirror.
    When the flowers are falling at yellow twilight, when things are sad
        and hushed,
    One does not hear songs and flutes, but only chimes and bells.
    The Imperial Patent on the Temple doors is written in letters of
        gold;
    For nuns’ quarters and monks’ cells ample space is allowed.
    For green moss and bright moonlight--plenty of room provided;
    In a hovel opposite is a sick man who has hardly room to lie down.
    I remember once when at P’ing-yang they were building a great man’s
        house
    How it swallowed up the housing space of thousands of ordinary men.
    The Immortals[70] are leaving us, two by two, and their houses are
        turned into Temples;
    I begin to fear that the whole world will become a vast convent.

[69] 785-805.

[70] Hsien Tsung’s brothers?


THE CHARCOAL-SELLER

(A SATIRE AGAINST “KOMMANDATUR”)

    An old charcoal-seller
    Cutting wood and burning charcoal in the forests of the Southern
        Mountain.
    His face, stained with dust and ashes, has turned to the colour of
        smoke.
    The hair on his temples is streaked with gray: his ten fingers are
        black.
    The money he gets by selling charcoal, how far does it go?
    It is just enough to clothe his limbs and put food in his mouth.
    Although, alas, the coat on his back is a coat without lining.
    He hopes for the coming of cold weather, to send up the price of
        coal!
    Last night, outside the city,--a whole foot of snow;
    At dawn he drives the charcoal wagon along the frozen ruts.
    Oxen,--weary; man,--hungry: the sun, already high;
    Outside the Gate, to the south of the Market, at last they stop in
        the mud.
    Suddenly, a pair of prancing horsemen. Who can it be coming?
    A public official in a yellow coat and a boy in a white shirt.
    In their hands they hold a written warrant: on their tongues--the
        words of an order;
    They turn back the wagon and curse the oxen, leading them off to the
        north.
    A whole wagon of charcoal,
    More than a thousand pieces!
    If officials choose to take it away, the woodman may not complain.
    Half a piece of red silk and a single yard of damask,
    The Courtiers have tied to the oxen’s collar, as the price
    of a wagon of coal!


THE POLITICIAN

    I was going to the City to sell the herbs I had plucked;
    On the way I rested by some trees at the Blue Gate.
    Along the road there came a horseman riding;
    Whose face was pale with a strange look of dread.
    Friends and relations, waiting to say good-bye,
    Pressed at his side, but he did not dare to pause.
    I, in wonder, asked the people about me
    Who he was and what had happened to him.
    They told me this was a Privy Councillor
    Whose grave duties were like the pivot of State.
    His food allowance was ten thousand cash;
    Three times a day the Emperor came to his house.
    Yesterday he was called to a meeting of Heroes:
    To-day he is banished to the country of Yai-chou.
    So always, the Counsellors of Kings;
    Favour and ruin changed between dawn and dusk!
    Green, green,--the grass of the Eastern Suburb;
    And amid the grass, a road that leads to the hills.
    Resting in peace among the white clouds,
    At last he has made a “coup” that cannot fail!


THE OLD MAN WITH THE BROKEN ARM

(A SATIRE ON MILITARISM)

    At Hsin-fēng an old man--four-score and eight;
    The hair on his head and the hair of his eyebrows--white as the
        new snow.
    Leaning on the shoulders of his great-grandchildren, he walks in
        front of the Inn;
    With his left arm he leans on their shoulders; his right arm is
        broken.
    I asked the old man how many years had passed since he broke his arm;
    I also asked the cause of the injury, how and why it happened?
    The old man said he was born and reared in the District of Hsin-fēng;
    At the time of his birth--a wise reign; no wars or discords.
    “Often I listened in the Pear-Tree Garden to the sound of flute and
        song;
    Naught I knew of banner and lance; nothing of arrow or bow.
    Then came the wars of T’ien-pao[71] and the great levy of men;
    Of three men in each house,--one man was taken.
    And those to whom the lot fell, where were they taken to?
    Five months’ journey, a thousand miles--away to Yün-nan.
    We heard it said that in Yün-nan there flows the Lu River;
    As the flowers fall from the pepper-trees, poisonous vapours rise.
    When the great army waded across, the water seethed like a cauldron;
    When barely ten had entered the water, two or three were dead.
    To the north of my village, to the south of my village the sound of
        weeping and wailing.
    Children parting from fathers and mothers; husbands parting from
        wives.
    Everyone says that in expeditions against the Min tribes
    Of a million men who are sent out, not one returns.
              I, that am old, was then twenty-four;
    My name and fore-name were written down in the rolls of the Board of
        War.
    In the depth of the night not daring to let any one know
    I secretly took a huge stone and dashed it against my arm.
    For drawing the bow and waving the banner now wholly unfit;
    I knew henceforward I should not be sent to fight in Yün-nan.
    Bones broken and sinews wounded could not fail to hurt;
    I was ready enough to bear pain, if only I got back home.
    My arm--broken ever since; it was sixty years ago.
    One limb, although destroyed,--whole body safe!
    But even now on winter nights when the wind and rain blow
    From evening on till day’s dawn I cannot sleep for pain.
                    Not sleeping for pain
                    Is a small thing to bear,
    Compared with the joy of being alive when all the rest are dead.
    For otherwise, years ago, at the ford of Lu River
    My body would have died and my soul hovered by the bones that no one
        gathered.
    A ghost, I’d have wandered in Yün-nan, always looking for home.
    Over the graves of ten thousand soldiers, mournfully hovering.”
                    So the old man spoke.
                And I bid you listen to his words
                    Have you not heard
    That the Prime Minister of K’ai-yüan,[72] Sung K’ai-fu,
    Did not reward frontier exploits, lest a spirit of aggression should
        prevail?
                    And have you not heard
    That the Prime Minister of T’ien-Pao, Yang Kuo-chung[73]
    Desiring to win imperial favour, started a frontier war?
    But long before he could win the war, people had lost their temper;
    Ask the man with the broken arm in the village of Hsin-fēng?

[71] A.D. 742-755.

[72] 713-742.

[73] Cousin of the notorious mistress of Ming-huang, Yang Kuei-fei.


KEPT WAITING IN THE BOAT AT CHIU-K’OU TEN DAYS BY AN ADVERSE WIND

    White billows and huge waves block the river crossing;
    Wherever I go, danger and difficulty; whatever I do, failure.
    Just as in my worldly career I wander and lose the road,
    So when I come to the river crossing, I am stopped by contrary winds.
    Of fishes and prawns sodden in the rain the smell fills my nostrils;
    With the stings of insects that come with the fog, my whole body is
        sore.
    I am growing old, time flies, and my short span runs out.
    While I sit in a boat at Chiu-k’ou, wasting ten days!


ON BOARD SHIP: READING YÜAN CHĒN’S POEMS

    I take your poems in my hand and read them beside the candle;
    The poems are finished: the candle is low: dawn not yet come.
    With sore eyes by the guttering candle still I sit in the dark,
    Listening to waves that, driven by the wind, strike the prow of
        the ship.


ARRIVING AT HSÜN-YANG

(TWO POEMS)

(1)

    A bend of the river brings into view two triumphal arches;
    That is the gate in the western wall of the suburbs of Hsün-yang.
    I have still to travel in my solitary boat three or four leagues--
    By misty waters and rainy sands, while the yellow dusk thickens.

(2)

    We are almost come to Hsün-yang: how my thoughts are stirred
    As we pass to the south of Yü Liang’s[74] tower and the east of
        P’ēn Port.
    The forest trees are leafless and withered,--after the mountain
        rain;
    The roofs of the houses are hidden low among the river mists.
    The horses, fed on water grass, are too weak to carry their load;
    The cottage walls of wattle and thatch let the wind blow on one’s
        bed.
    In the distance I see red-wheeled coaches driving from the town-gate;
    They have taken the trouble, these civil people, to meet their new
        Prefect!

[74] Died A.D. 340. Giles, 2526.


MADLY SINGING IN THE MOUNTAINS

    There is no one among men that has not a special failing:
    And my failing consists in writing verses.
    I have broken away from the thousand ties of life:
    But this infirmity still remains behind.
    Each time that I look at a fine landscape:
    Each time that I meet a loved friend,
    I raise my voice and recite a stanza of poetry
    And am glad as though a God had crossed my path.
    Ever since the day I was banished to Hsün-yang
    Half my time I have lived among the hills.
    And often, when I have finished a new poem,
    Alone I climb the road to the Eastern Rock.
    I lean my body on the banks of white stone:
    I pull down with my hands a green cassia branch.
    My mad singing startles the valleys and hills:
    The apes and birds all come to peep.
    Fearing to become a laughing-stock to the world,
    I choose a place that is unfrequented by men.


RELEASING A MIGRANT “YEN” (WILD GOOSE)

    At Nine Rivers,[75] in the tenth year,[76] in winter,--heavy snow;
    The river-water covered with ice and the forests broken with their
        load.[77]
    The birds of the air, hungry and cold, went flying east and west;
    And with them flew a migrant “yen,” loudly clamouring for food.
    Among the snow it pecked for grass; and rested on the surface of the
        ice:
    It tried with its wings to scale the sky; but its tired flight was
        slow.
    The boys of the river spread a net and caught the bird as it flew;
    They took it in their hands to the city-market and sold it there
        alive.
    I that was once a man of the North am now an exile here:
    Bird and man, in their different kind, are each strangers in the
        south.
    And because the sight of an exiled bird wounded an exile’s heart,
    I paid your ransom and set you free, and you flew away to the clouds.
    Yen, Yen, flying to the clouds, tell me, whither shall you go?
    Of all things I bid you, do not fly to the land of the north-west
    In Huai-hsi there are rebel bands[78] that have not been subdued;
    And a thousand thousand armoured men have long been camped in war.
    The official army and the rebel army have grown old in their opposite
        trenches;
    The soldier’s rations have grown so small, they’ll be glad of even
        you.
    The brave boys, in their hungry plight, will shoot you and eat your
        flesh;
    They will pluck from your body those long feathers and make them into
        arrow-wings!

[75] Kiukiang, the poet’s place of exile.

[76] A.D. 815. His first winter at Kiukiang.

[77] By the weight of snow.

[78] The revolt of Wu Yüan-chi.


TO A PORTRAIT PAINTER WHO DESIRED HIM TO SIT

    _You_, so bravely splashing reds and blues!
    Just when _I_ am getting wrinkled and old.
    Why should you waste the moments of inspiration
    Tracing the withered limbs of a sick man?
    Tall, tall is the Palace of Ch’i-lin;[79]
    But my deeds have not been frescoed on its walls.
    Minutely limned on a foot of painting silk--
    What can I do with a portrait such as _that_?

[79] One of the “Record Offices” of the T’ang dynasty, where meritorious
deeds were illustrated on the walls.


SEPARATION

    Yesterday I heard that such-a-one was gone;
    This morning they tell me that so-and-so is dead.
    Of friends and acquaintances more than two-thirds
    Have suffered change and passed to the Land of Ghosts.
    Those that are gone I shall not see again;
    They, alas, are for ever finished and done.
    Those that are left,--where are they now?
    They are all scattered,--a thousand miles away.
    Those I have known and loved through all my life,
    On the fingers of my hand--how many do I count?
    Only the prefects of T’ung, Kuo and Li
    And Fēng Province--just those four.[80]
    Longing for each other we are all grown gray;
    Through the Fleeting World rolled like a wave in the stream.
    Alas that the feasts and frolics of old days
    Have withered and vanished, bringing us to this!
    When shall we meet and drink a cup of wine
    And laughing gaze into each other’s eyes?

[80] Yüan Chēn (d. 831), Ts’ui Hsüan-liang (d. 833), Liu Yü-hsi
(d. 842), and Li Chien (d. 821).


HAVING CLIMBED TO THE TOPMOST PEAK OF THE INCENSE-BURNER MOUNTAIN

    Up and up, the Incense-burner Peak!
    In my heart is stored what my eyes and ears perceived.
    All the year--detained by official business;
    To-day at last I got a chance to go.
    Grasping the creepers, I clung to dangerous rocks;
    My hands and feet--weary with groping for hold.
    There came with me three or four friends,
    But two friends dared not go further.
    At last we reached the topmost crest of the Peak;
    My eyes were blinded, my soul rocked and reeled.
    The chasm beneath me--ten thousand feet;
    The ground I stood on, only a foot wide.
    If you have not exhausted the scope of seeing and hearing,
    How can you realize the wideness of the world?
    The waters of the River looked narrow as a ribbon,
    P’ēn Castle smaller than a man’s fist.
    How it clings, the dust of the world’s halter!
    It chokes my limbs: I cannot shake it away.
    Thinking of retirement,[81] I heaved an envious sigh,
    Then, with lowered head, came back to the Ants’ Nest.

[81] _I.e._, retirement from office.


EATING BAMBOO-SHOOTS

    My new Province is a land of bamboo-groves:
    Their shoots in spring fill the valleys and hills.
    The mountain woodman cuts an armful of them
    And brings them down to sell at the early market.
    Things are cheap in proportion as they are common;
    For two farthings, I buy a whole bundle.
    I put the shoots in a great earthen pot
    And heat them up along with boiling rice.
    The purple nodules broken,--like an old brocade;
    The white skin opened,--like new pearls.
    Now every day I eat them recklessly;
    For a long time I have not touched meat.
    All the time I was living at Lo-yang
    They could not give me enough to suit my taste,
    Now I can have as many shoots as I please;
    For each breath of the south-wind makes a new bamboo!


THE RED COCKATOO

    Sent as a present from Annam--
    A red cockatoo.
    Coloured like the peach-tree blossom,
    Speaking with the speech of men.
    And they did to it what is always done
    To the learned and eloquent.
    They took a cage with stout bars
    And shut it up inside.


AFTER LUNCH

    After lunch--one short nap:
    On waking up--two cups of tea.
    Raising my head, I see the sun’s light
    Once again slanting to the south-west.
    Those who are happy regret the shortness of the day;
    Those who are sad tire of the year’s sloth.
    But those whose hearts are devoid of joy or sadness
    Just go on living, regardless of “short” or “long.”


ALARM AT FIRST ENTERING THE YANG-TZE GORGES

Written in 818, when he was being towed up the rapids to Chung-chou.

    Above, a mountain ten thousand feet high:
    Below, a river a thousand fathoms deep.
    A strip of green, walled by cliffs of stone:
    Wide enough for the passage of a single reed.[82]
    At Chü-t’ang a straight cleft yawns:
    At Yen-yü islands block the stream.
    Long before night the walls are black with dusk;
    Without wind white waves rise.
    The big rocks are like a flat sword:
    The little rocks resemble ivory tusks.

[82] See Odes, v, 7.

           *       *       *       *       *

    We are stuck fast and cannot move a step.
    How much the less, three hundred miles?[83]
    Frail and slender, the twisted-bamboo rope:
    Weak, the dangerous hold of the towers’ feet.
    A single slip--the whole convoy lost:
    And _my_ life hangs on _this_ thread!
    I have heard a saying “He that has an upright heart
    Shall walk scathless through the lands of Man and Mo.”[84]
    How can I believe that since the world began
    In every shipwreck none have drowned but rogues?
    And how can I, born in evil days[85]
    And fresh from failure,[86] ask a kindness of Fate?
    Often I fear that these un-talented limbs
    Will be laid at last in an un-named grave!

[83] The distance to Chung-chou.

[84] Dangerous savages.

[85] Of civil war.

[86] Alluding to his renewed banishment.


ON BEING REMOVED FROM HSÜN-YANG AND SENT TO CHUNG-CHOU

A remote place in the mountains of Pa (Ssech’uan)

    Before this, when I was stationed at Hsün-yang,
    Already I regretted the fewness of friends and guests.
    Suddenly, suddenly,--bearing a stricken heart
    I left the gates, with nothing to comfort me.
    Henceforward,--relegated to deep seclusion
    In a bottomless gorge, flanked by precipitous mountains,
    Five months on end the passage of boats is stopped
    By the piled billows that toss and leap like colts.
    The inhabitants of Pa resemble wild apes;
    Fierce and lusty, they fill the mountains and prairies.
    Among such as these I cannot hope for friends
    And am pleased with anyone who is even remotely human!


PLANTING FLOWERS ON THE EASTERN EMBANKMENT

Written when Governor of Chung-Chou

    I took money and bought flowering trees
    And planted them out on the bank to the east of the Keep.
    I simply bought whatever had most blooms,
    Not caring whether peach, apricot, or plum.
    A hundred fruits, all mixed up together;
    A thousand branches, flowering in due rotation.
    Each has its season coming early or late;
    But to all alike the fertile soil is kind.
    The red flowers hang like a heavy mist;
    The white flowers gleam like a fall of snow.
    The wandering bees cannot bear to leave them;
    The sweet birds also come there to roost.
    In front there flows an ever-running stream;
    Beneath there is built a little flat terrace.
    Sometimes I sweep the flagstones of the terrace;
    Sometimes, in the wind, I raise my cup and drink.
    The flower-branches screen my head from the sun;
    The flower-buds fall down into my lap.
    Alone drinking, alone singing my songs
    I do not notice that the moon is level with the steps.
    The people of Pa do not care for flowers;
    All the spring no one has come to look.
    But their Governor General, alone with his cup of wine
    Sits till evening and will not move from the place!


CHILDREN

Written _circa_ 820

    My niece, who is six years old, is called “Miss Tortoise”;
    My daughter of three,--little “Summer Dress.”
    One is beginning to learn to joke and talk;
    The other can already recite poems and songs.
    At morning they play clinging about my feet;
    At night they sleep pillowed against my dress.
    Why, children, did you reach the world so late,
    Coming to me just when my years are spent?
    Young things draw our feelings to them;
    Old people easily give their hearts.
    The sweetest vintage at last turns sour;
    The full moon in the end begins to wane.
    And so with men the bonds of love and affection
    Soon may change to a load of sorrow and care.
    But all the world is bound by love’s ties;
    Why did I think that I alone should escape?


PRUNING TREES

    Trees growing--right in front of my window;
    The trees are high and the leaves grow thick.
    Sad alas! the distant mountain view
    Obscured by this, dimly shows between.
    One morning I took knife and axe;
    With my own hand I lopped the branches off.
    Ten thousand leaves fall about my head;
    A thousand hills came before my eyes.
    Suddenly, as when clouds or mists break
    And straight through, the blue sky appears;
    Again, like the face of a friend one has loved
    Seen at last after an age of parting.
    First there came a gentle wind blowing;
    One by one the birds flew back to the tree.
    To ease my mind I gazed to the South East;
    As my eyes wandered, my thoughts went far away.
    Of men there is none that has not some preference;
    Of things there is none but mixes good with ill.
    It was not that I did not love the tender branches;
    But better still,--to see the green hills!


BEING VISITED BY A FRIEND DURING ILLNESS

    I have been ill so long that I do not count the days;
    At the southern window, evening--and again evening.
    Sadly chirping in the grasses under my eaves
    The winter sparrows morning and evening sing.
    By an effort I rise and lean heavily on my bed;
    Tottering I step towards the door of the courtyard.
    By chance I meet a friend who is coming to see me;
    Just as if I had gone specially to meet him.
    They took my couch and placed it in the setting sun;
    They spread my rug and I leaned on the balcony-pillar.
    Tranquil talk was better than any medicine;
    Gradually the feelings came back to my numbed heart.


ON THE WAY TO HANGCHOW: ANCHORED ON THE RIVER AT NIGHT

    Little sleeping and much grieving,--the traveller
    Rises at midnight and looks back towards home.
    The sands are bright with moonlight that joins the shores;
    The sail is white with dew that has covered the boat.
    Nearing the sea, the river grows broader and broader:
    Approaching autumn,--the nights longer and longer.
    Thirty times we have slept amid mists and waves,
    And still we have not reached Hang-chow!


STOPPING THE NIGHT AT JUNG-YANG

                I grew up at Jung-yang;
                I was still young when I left.
    On and on,--forty years passed
    Till again I stayed for the night at Jung-yang.
    When I went away, I was only eleven or twelve;
    This year I am turned fifty-six.
    Yet thinking back to the times of my childish games,
    Whole and undimmed, still they rise before me.
    The old houses have all disappeared;
    Down in the village none of my people are left.
    It is not only that streets and buildings have changed;
    But steep is level and level changed to steep!
    Alone unchanged, the waters of Ch’iu and Yu
    Passionless,--flow in their old course.


THE SILVER SPOON

    While on the road to his new province, Hang-chow, in 822, he sends a
    silver spoon to his niece A-kuei, whom he had been obliged to leave
    behind with her nurse, old Mrs. Ts’ao.

    To distant service my heart is well accustomed;
    When I left home, it wasn’t _that_ which was difficult
    But because I had to leave Miss Kuei at home--
    For this it was that tears filled my eyes.
    Little girls ought to be daintily fed:
    Mrs. Ts’ao, please see to this!
    That’s why I’ve packed and sent a silver spoon;
    You will think of me and eat up your food nicely!


THE HAT GIVEN TO THE POET BY LI CHIEN

    Long ago to a white-haired gentleman
    You made the present of a black gauze hat.
    The gauze hat still sits on my head;
    But you already are gone to the Nether Springs.
    The thing is old, but still fit to wear;
    The man is gone and will never be seen again.
    Out on the hill the moon is shining to-night
    And the trees on your tomb are swayed by the autumn wind.


THE BIG RUG

    That so many of the poor should suffer from cold what can we do to
        prevent?
    To bring warmth to a single body is not much use.
    I wish I had a big rug ten thousand feet long,
    Which at one time could cover up every inch of the City.


AFTER GETTING DRUNK, BECOMING SOBER IN THE NIGHT

    Our party scattered at yellow dusk and I came home to bed;
    I woke at midnight and went for a walk, leaning heavily on a friend.
    As I lay on my pillow my vinous complexion, soothed by sleep, grew
        sober;
    In front of the tower the ocean moon, accompanying the tide, had
        risen.
    The swallows, about to return to the beams, went back to roost
        again;
    The candle at my window, just going out, suddenly revived its light.
    All the time till dawn came, still my thoughts were muddled;
    And in my ears something sounded like the music of flutes and
        strings.


REALIZING THE FUTILITY OF LIFE

Written on the wall of a priest’s cell, _circa_ 828

    Ever since the time when I was a lusty boy
    Down till now when I am ill and old,
    The things I have cared for have been different at different times,
    But my being _busy_, _that_ has never changed.
    _Then_ on the shore,--building sand-pagodas;
    _Now_, at Court, covered with tinkling jade.
    This and that,--equally childish games,
    Things whose substance passes in a moment of time!
    While the hands are busy, the heart cannot understand;
    When there are no Scriptures, then Doctrine is sound.[87]
    Even should one zealously strive to learn the Way,
    That very striving will make one’s error more.

[87] This is the teaching of the Dhyana Sect.


RISING LATE AND PLAYING WITH A-TS’UI, AGED TWO

Written in 831

    All the morning I have lain perversely in bed;
    Now at dusk I rise with many yawns.
    My warm stove is quick to get ablaze;
    At the cold mirror I am slow in doing my hair.
    With melted snow I boil fragrant tea;
    Seasoned with curds I cook a milk-pudding.
    At my sloth and greed there is no one but me to laugh;
    My cheerful vigour none but myself knows.
    The taste of my wine is mild and works no poison;
    The notes of my harp are soft and bring no sadness.
    To the Three Joys in the book of Mencius[88]
    I have added the fourth of playing with my baby-boy.

[88] “Mencius,” bk. vii, pt. i, 20.


ON A BOX CONTAINING HIS OWN WORKS

    I break up cypress and make a book-box;
    The box well-made,--and the cypress-wood tough.
    In it shall be kept what author’s works?
    The inscription says PO LO-T’IEN.
    All my life has been spent in writing books,
    From when I was young till now that I am old.
    First and last,--seventy whole volumes;
    Big and little,--three thousand themes.[89]
    Well I know in the end they’ll be scattered and lost;
    But I cannot bear to see them thrown away
    With my own hand I open and shut the locks,
    And put it carefully in front of the book-curtain.
    I am like Tēng Pai-tao;[90]
    But to-day there is not any Wang Ts’an.[91]
    All I can do is to divide them among my daughters
    To be left by them to give to my grandchildren.

[89] _I.e._, separate poems, essays, etc.

[90] Who was obliged to abandon his only child on the roadside.

[91] Who rescued a foundling.


ON BEING SIXTY

Addressed to Liu Mēng-tē, who had asked for a poem. He was the same
age as Po Chü-i.

    Between thirty and forty, one is distracted by the Five Lusts;
    Between seventy and eighty, one is a prey to a hundred diseases.
    But from fifty to sixty one is free from all ills;
    Calm and still--the heart enjoys rest.
    I have put behind me Love and Greed; I have done with Profit and
        Fame;
    I am still short of illness and decay and far from decrepit age.
    Strength of limb I still possess to seek the rivers and hills;
    Still my heart has spirit enough to listen to flutes and strings.
    At leisure I open new wine and taste several cups;
    Drunken I recall old poems and sing a whole volume.
    Mēng-tē has asked for a poem and herewith I exhort him
    Not to complain of three-score, “the time of obedient ears.”[92]

[92] Confucius said that it was not till _sixty_ that “his ears obeyed
him.” This age was therefore called “the time of obedient ears.”


CLIMBING THE TERRACE OF KUAN-YIN AND LOOKING AT THE CITY

    Hundreds of houses, thousands of houses,--like a chess-board.
    The twelve streets like a field planted with rows of cabbage.
    In the distance perceptible, dim, dim--the fire of approaching dawn;
    And a single row of stars lying to the west of the Five Gates.


CLIMBING THE LING YING TERRACE AND LOOKING NORTH

    Mounting on high I begin to realize the smallness of Man’s Domain;
    Gazing into distance I begin to know the vanity of the Carnal World.
    I turn my head and hurry home--back to the Court and Market,
    A single grain of rice falling--into the Great Barn.


GOING TO THE MOUNTAINS WITH A LITTLE DANCING GIRL, AGED FIFTEEN

Written when the poet was about sixty-five

    Two top-knots not yet plaited into one.
    Of thirty years--just beyond half.
    You who are really a lady of silks and satins
    Are now become my hill and stream companion!
    At the spring fountains together we splash and play:
    On the lovely trees together we climb and sport.
    Her cheeks grow rosy, as she quickens her sleeve-dancing:
    Her brows grow sad, as she slows her song’s tune.
    Don’t go singing the Song of the Willow Branches,[93]
    When there’s no one here with a heart for you to break!

[93] A plaintive love-song, to which Po Chü-i had himself written words.


DREAMING OF YÜAN CHĒN

This was written eight years after Yüan Chēn’s death, when Po-Chü-i
was sixty-eight.

    At night you came and took my hand and we wandered together in my
        dream;
    When I woke in the morning there was no one to stop the tears that
        fell on my handkerchief.
    On the banks of the Ch’ang my aged body three times[94] has passed
        through sickness;
    At Hsien-yang[95] to the grasses on your grave eight times has
        autumn come.
    You lie buried beneath the springs and your bones are mingled with
        the clay.
    I--lodging in the world of men; my hair white as snow.
    A-wei and Han-lang[96] both followed in their turn;
    Among the shadows of the Terrace of Night did you know them or not?

[94] Since you died.

[95] Near Ch’ang-an, modern Si-ngan-fu.

[96] Affectionate names of Li Chien and Ts’ui Hsüan-liang.


A DREAM OF MOUNTAINEERING

Written when he was over seventy

    At night, in my dream, I stoutly climbed a mountain.
    Going out alone with my staff of holly-wood.
    A thousand crags, a hundred hundred valleys--
    In my dream-journey none were unexplored
    And all the while my feet never grew tired
    And my step was as strong as in my young days.
    Can it be that when the mind travels backward
    The body also returns to its old state?
    And can it be, as between body and soul,
    That the body may languish, while the soul is still strong?
    Soul and body--both are vanities:
    Dreaming and waking--both alike unreal.
    In the day my feet are palsied and tottering;
    In the night my steps go striding over the hills.
    As day and night are divided in equal parts--
    Between the two, I _get_ as much as I _lose_.


EASE

    Congratulating himself on the comforts of his life after his
    retirement from office. Written _circa_ 844.

    Lined coat, warm cap and easy felt slippers,
    In the little tower, at the low window, sitting over the sunken
        brazier.
    Body at rest, heart at peace; no need to rise early.
    I wonder if the courtiers at the Western Capital know of these
        things, or not?


ON HEARING SOMEONE SING A POEM BY YÜAN CHĒN

Written long after Chēn’s death

    No new poems his brush will trace:
      Even his fame is dead.
    His old poems are deep in dust
      At the bottom of boxes and cupboards.
    Once lately, when someone was singing,
      Suddenly I heard a verse--
    Before I had time to catch the words
      A pain had stabbed my heart.


THE PHILOSOPHERS

LAO-TZŬ

    “Those who speak know nothing;
    Those who know are silent.”
    These words, as I am told,
    Were spoken by Lao-tzŭ.
    If we are to believe that Lao-tzŭ
        Was himself _one who knew_,
    How comes it that he wrote a book
        Of five thousand words?

CHUANG-TZŬ, THE MONIST

    Chuang-tzŭ levels all things
    And reduces them to the same Monad.
    But _I_ say that even in their sameness
    Difference may be found.
    Although in following the promptings of their nature
    They display the same tendency,
    Yet it seems to me that in some ways
    A phœnix is superior to a reptile!


TAOISM AND BUDDHISM

Written shortly before his death

    A traveller came from across the seas
    Telling of strange sights.
    “In a deep fold of the sea-hills
    I saw a terrace and tower.
    In the midst there stood a Fairy Temple
    With one niche empty.
    They all told me this was waiting
    For Lo-t’ien to come.”

    Traveller, I have studied the Empty Gate;[97]
    I am no disciple of Fairies
    The story you have just told
    Is nothing but an idle tale.
    The hills of ocean shall never be
    Lo-t’ien’s home.
    When I leave the earth it will be to go
    To the Heaven of Bliss Fulfilled.[98]

[97] Buddhism. The poem is quite frivolous, as is shown by his claim to
Bodhisattva-hood.

[98] The “tushita” Heaven, where Bodhisattvas wait till it is time for
them to appear on earth as Buddhas.


LAST POEM

           *       *       *       *       *

    They have put my bed beside the unpainted screen;
    They have shifted my stove in front of the blue curtain.
    I listen to my grandchildren, reading me a book;
    I watch the servants, heating up my soup.
    With rapid pencil I answer the poems of friends;
    I feel in my pockets and pull out medicine-money.
    When this superintendence of trifling affairs is done,
    I lie back on my pillows and sleep with my face to the
    South.




THE LOOM OF YEARS


    In the light of the silent stars that shine on the struggling sea,
    In the weary cry of the wind and the whisper of flower and tree,
    Under the breath of laughter, deep in the tide of tears,
    I hear the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.

    The leaves of the winter wither and sink in the forest mould
    To colour the flowers of April with purple and white and gold:
    Light and scent and music die and are born again
    In the heart of a grey-haired woman who wakes in a world of pain.

    The hound, the fawn and the hawk, and the doves that croon and coo,
    We are all one woof of the weaving and the one warp threads us through,
    One flying cloud on the shuttle that carries our hopes and fears
    As it goes thro' the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.

    The crosiers of the fern, and the crown, the crown of the rose,
    Pass with our hearts to the Silence where the wings of music close,
    Pass and pass to the Timeless that never a moment mars,
    Pass and pass to the Darkness that made the suns and stars.

    Has the soul gone out in the Darkness? Is the dust sealed from sight?
    Ah, hush, for the woof of the ages returns thro' the warp of the night!
    Never that shuttle loses one thread of our hopes and fears,
    As It comes thro' the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.

    O, woven in one wide Loom thro' the throbbing weft of the whole,
    One in spirit and flesh, one in body and soul,
    The leaf on the winds of autumn, the bird in its hour to die,
    The heart in its muffled anguish, the sea in its mournful cry,

    One with the flower of a day, one with the withered moon,
    One with the granite mountains that melt into the noon,
    One with the dream that triumphs beyond the light of the spheres,
    We come from the Loom of the Weaver that weaves the Web of Years.




IN THE HEART OF THE WOODS


    I

    The Heart of the woods, I hear it, beating, beating afar,
    In the glamour and gloom of the night, in the light of the rosy star,
    In the cold sweet voice of the bird, in the throb of the flower-soft
        sea!...
    For the Heart of the woods is the Heart of the world and the
        Heart of Eternity,
    Ay, and the burning passionate Heart of the heart in you and me.

    Love of my heart, love of the world, linking the golden moon
    With the flowery moths that flutter thro' the scented leaves of June,
    And the mind of man with beauty, and youth with the dreaming night
    Of stars and flowers and waters and breasts of glimmering white,
    And streaming hair of fragrant dusk and flying limbs of lovely light;

    Life of me, life of me, shining in sun and cloud and wind,
    In the dark eyes of the fawn and the eyes of the hound behind,
    In the leaves that lie in the seed unsown, and the dream of the
        babe unborn,
    O, flaming tides of my blood, as you flow thro' flower and root
        and thorn,
    I feel you burning the boughs of night to kindle the fires of morn.

    Soul of me, soul of me, yearning wherever a lavrock sings,
    Or the crimson gloom is winnowed by the whirr of wood-doves' wings,
    Or the spray of the foam-bow rustles in the white dawn of the moon,
    And mournful billows moan aloud, _Come soon, soon, soon,
    Come soon, O Death with the Heart of love and the secret of the rune._

    Heart of me, heart of me, heart of me, beating, beating afar,
    In the green gloom of the night, in the light of the rosy star,
    In the cold sweet voice of the bird, in the throb of the flower-soft
        sea!...
    O, the Heart of the woods is the Heart of the world and the
        Heart of Eternity,
    Ay, and the burning passionate Heart of the heart in you and me.


    II

    O, Death will never find us in the heart of the wood,
      The song is in my blood, night and day:
    We will pluck a scented petal from the Rose upon the Rood
      Where Love lies bleeding on the way.
    We will listen to the linnet and watch the waters leap,
      When the clouds go dreaming by,
    And under the wild roses and the stars we will sleep,
      And wander on together, you and I.

    We shall understand the mystery that none has understood,
      We shall know why the leafy gloom is green.
    O, Death will never find us in the heart of the wood
      When we see what the stars have seen!
    We have heard the hidden song of the soft dews falling
      At the end of the last dark sky,
    Where all the sorrows of the world are calling,
      We must wander on together, you and I.

    They are calling, calling, _Away, come away!_
      And we know not whence they call;
    For the song is in our hearts, we hear it night and day,
      As the deep tides rise and fall:
    _O, Death will never find us in the heart of the wood,
      While the hours and the years roll by!_
    We have heard it, we have heard it, but we have not understood,
      We must wander on together, you and I.

    The wind may beat upon us, the rain may blind our eyes,
      The leaves may fall beneath the winter's wing;
    But we shall hear the music of the dream that never dies,
      And we shall know the secret of the Spring.
    We shall know how all the blossoms of evil and of good
      Are mingled in the meadows of the sky;
    And then--if Death can find us in the heart of the wood--
      We shall wander on together, you and I.




ART

(IMITATED FROM DE BANVILLE AND GAUTIER)


    I

    Yes! Beauty still rebels!
    Our dreams like clouds disperse:
      She dwells
    In agate, marble, verse.

    No false constraint be thine!
    But, for right walking, choose
      The fine,
    The strict cothurnus, Muse.

    Vainly ye seek to escape
    The toil! The yielding phrase
      Ye shape
    Is clay, not chrysoprase.

    And all in vain ye scorn
    That seeming ease which ne'er
      Was born
    Of aught but love and care.

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Recall the gods that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky.

    For Beauty still rebels!
    Our dreams like clouds disperse:
      She dwells
    In agate, marble, verse.


    II

    When Beauty from the sea,
    With breasts of whiter rose
      Than we
    Behold on earth, arose.

    Naked thro' Time returned
    The Bliss of Heaven that day,
      And burned
    The dross of earth away.

    Kings at her splendour quailed.
    For all his triple steel
      She haled
    War at her chariot-wheel.

    The rose and lily bowed
    To cast, of odour sweet
      A cloud
    Before her wandering feet.

    And from her radiant eyes
    There shone on soul and sense
      The skies'
    Divine indifference.

    O, mortal memory fond!
    Slowly she passed away
      Beyond
    The curling clouds of day.

    _Return_, we cry, _return_,
    Till in the sadder light
      We learn
    That she was infinite.

    The Dream that from the sea
    With breasts of whiter rose
      Than we
    Behold on earth, arose.


    III

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Becall the dreams that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky;
    And kings that not endure
    In bronze to re-ascend
      Secure
    Until the world shall end.

    Poet, let passion sleep
    Till with the cosmic rhyme
      You keep
    Eternal tone and time,

    By rule of hour and flower,
    By strength of stern restraint
      And power
    To fail and not to faint.

    The task is hard to learn
    While all the songs of Spring
      Return
    Along the blood and sing.

    Yet hear--from her deep skies,
    How Art, for all your pain,
      Still cries
    _Ye must be born again!_

    Reject the wreath of rose,
    Take up the crown of thorn
      That shows
    To-night a child is born.

    The far immortal face
    In chosen onyx fine
      Enchase,
    Delicate line by line.

    Strive with Carrara, fight
    With Parian, till there steal
      To light
    Apollo's pure profile.

    Set the great lucid form
    Free from its marble tomb
      To storm
    The heights of death and doom.

    Take up the sculptor's tool!
    Recall the gods that die
      To rule
    In Parian o'er the sky,




TRIOLET


    Love, awake! Ah, let thine eyes
      Open, clouded with thy dreams.
    Now the shy sweet rosy skies,
      Love, awake. Ah, let thine eyes
    Dawn before the last star dies.
      O'er thy breast the rose-light gleams:
    Love, awake! Ah, let thine eyes
      Open, clouded with thy dreams.




A TRIPLE BALLAD OF OLD JAPAN


    In old Japan, by creek and bay,
      The blue plum-blossoms blow,
    Where birds with sea-blue plumage gay
      Thro' sea-blue branches go:
    Dragons are coiling down below
      Like dragons on a fan;
    And pig-tailed sailors lurching slow
      Thro' streets of old Japan.

    There, in the dim blue death of day
      Where white tea-roses grow,
    Petals and scents are strewn astray
      Till night be sweet enow,
    Then lovers wander whispering low
      As lovers only can,
    Where rosy paper lanterns glow
      Thro' streets of old Japan.

    From Wonderland to Yea-or-Nay
      The junks of Weal-and-Woe
    Dream on the purple water-way
      Nor ever meet a foe;
    Though still, with stiff mustachio
      And crookéd ataghan,
    Their pirates guard with pomp and show
      The ships of old Japan.

    That land is very far away,
      We lost it long ago!
    No fairies ride the cherry spray,
      No witches mop and mow,
    The violet wells have ceased to flow;
      And O, how faint and wan
    The dawn on Fusiyama's snow,
      The peak of old Japan.

    Half smilingly, our hearts delay,
      Half mournfully forego
    The blue fantastic twisted day
      When faithful Konojo,
    For small white Lily Hasu-ko
      Knelt in the Butsudan,
    And her tomb opened to bestrow
      Lilies thro' old Japan.

    There was a game they used to play
      I' the San-ju-san-jen Do,
    They filled a little lacquer tray
      With powders in a row,
    Dry dust of flowers from Tashiro
     To Mount Daimugenzan,
    Dry little heaps of dust, but O
      They breathed of old Japan.

    Then knights in blue and gold array
      Would on their thumbs bestow
    A pinch from every heap and say,
      With many a _hum_ and _ho_,
    What blossoms, nodding to and fro
      For joy of maid or man,
    Conceived the scents that puzzled so
      The brains of old Japan.

    The hundred ghosts have ceased to affray
      The dust of Kyotó,
    Ah yet, what phantom blooms a-sway
      Murmur, a-loft, a-low,
    In dells no scythe of death can mow,
      No power of reason scan,
    O, what Samúrai singers know
      The Flower of old Japan?

    Dry dust of blossoms, dim and gray,
      Lost on the wind? Ah, no,
    Hark, from yon clump of English may,
      A cherub's mocking crow,
    A sudden twang, a sweet, swift throe,
      As Daisy trips by Dan,
    And careless Cupid drops his bow
      And laughs--from old Japan.

    _There, in the dim blue death of day
       Where white tea-roses grow,
    Petals and scents are strewn astray
      Till night be sweet enow,
    Then lovers wander, whispering low,
      As lovers only can,
    Where rosy paper lanterns glow
      Thro' streets of old Japan._




THE SYMBOLIST


    Help me to seek that unknown land!
      I kneel before the shrine.
    Help me to feel the hidden hand
      That ever holdeth mine.

    I kneel before the Word, I kneel
      Before the Cross of flame
    I cry, as thro' the gloom I steal,
      The glory of the Name.

    Help me to mourn, and I shall love;
      What grief is like to mine?
    Crown me with thorn, the stars above
      Shall in the circlet shine!

    The Temple opens wide: none sees
      The love, the dream, the light!
    O, blind and finite, are not these
      Blinding and infinite?

    The veil, the veil is rent: the skies
      Are white with wings of fire,
    Where victim souls triumphant rise
      In torment of desire.

    Help me to seek: I would not find,
      For when I find I know
    I shall have clasped the hollow wind
      And built a house of snow.




HAUNTED IN OLD JAPAN


    Music of the star-shine shimmering o'er the sea
    Mirror me no longer in the dusk of memory:
    Dim and white the rose-leaves drift along the shore.
    Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    _All along the purple creek, lit with silver foam,
    Silent, silent voices, cry no more of home!
    Soft beyond the cherry-trees, o'er the dim lagoon,
    Dawns the crimson lantern of the large low moon._

    We that loved in April, we that turned away
    Laughing ere the wood-dove crooned across the May,
    Watch the withered rose-leaves drift along the shore.
    Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    We the Sons of Reason, we that chose to bride
    Knowledge, and rejected the Dream that we denied,
    We that chose the Wisdom that triumphs for an hour,
    We that let the young love perish like a flower....

    We that hurt the kind heart, we that went astray,
    We that in the darkness idly dreamed of day....
    ... Ah! The dreary rose-leaves drift along the shore.
          Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    Lonely starry faces, wonderful and white,
    Yearning with a cry across the dim sweet night,
    All our dreams are blown a-drift as flowers before a fan,
    All our hearts are haunted in the heart of old Japan.

    Haunted, haunted, haunted--we that mocked and sinned
    Hear the vanished voices wailing down the wind,
    Watch the ruined rose-leaves drift along the shore.
          Wind among the roses, blow no more!

    _All along the purple creek, lit with silver foam,
    Sobbing, sobbing voices, cry no more of home!
    Soft beyond the cherry-trees, o'er the dim lagoon,
    Dawns the crimson lantern of the large low moon._




NECROMANCY

(AFTER THE PROSE OF BAUDELAIRE)


    This necromantic palace, dim and rich,
      Dim as a dream, rich as a reverie,
    I knew it all of old, surely I knew
    This floating twilight tinged with rose and blue,
              This moon-soft carven niche
      Whence the calm marble, wan as memory,
    Slopes to the wine-brimmed bath of cold dark fire
    Perfumed with old regret and dead desire.

    There the soul, slumbering in the purple waves
      Of indolence, dreams of the phantom years,
    Dreams of the wild sweet flower of red young lips
    Meeting and murmuring in the dark eclipse
            Of joy, where pain still craves
      One tear of love to mingle with their tears,
    One passionate welcome ere the wild farewell,
    One flash of heaven across the fires of hell.

       *   *   *   *

    Queen of my dreams, queen of my pitiless dreams,
      Dim idol, moulded of the wild white rose,
    Coiled like a panther in that silken gloom
    Of scented cushions, where the rich hushed room
            Breaks into soft warm gleams,
    As from her slumbrous clouds Queen Venus glows,
    Slowly thine arms up-lift to me, thine eyes
    Meet mine, without communion or surmise.

    Here, at thy feet, I watched, I watched all day
      Night floating in thine eyes, then with my hands
    Covered my face from that dumb cry of pain:
    And when at last I dared to look again
            My heart was far away,
    Wrapt in the fragrant gloom of Eastern lands,
    Under the flower-white stars of tropic skies
    Where soft black floating flowers turned to ... thine eyes.

    I breathe, I breathe the perfume of thine hair:
      Bury in thy deep hair my fevered face,
    Till as to men athirst in desert dreams
    The savour and colour and sound of cool dark streams
            Float round me everywhere,
      And memories float from some forgotten place,
    Fulfilling hopeless eyes with hopeless tears
    And fleeting light of unforgotten years.

    Dim clouds of music in the dim rich hours
      Float to me thro' the twilight of thine hair,
    And sails like blossoms float o'er purple seas,
    And under dark green skies the soft warm breeze
            Washes dark fruit, dark flowers,
      Dark tropic maidens in some island lair
    Couched on the warm sand nigh the creaming foam
    To dream and sing their tawny lovers home.

    Lost in the magic ocean of thine hair
      I find the haven of the heart of song:
    There tired ships rest against the pale red sky!
    And yet again there comes a thin sad cry
            And all the shining air
      Fades, where the tall dark singing seamen throng
    From many generations, many climes,
    Fades, fades, as it has faded many times.

    I hear the sweet cool whisper of the waves!
      Drowned in the slumbrous billows of thine hair,
    I dream as one that sinks thro' passionate hours
    In a strange ship's wild fraughtage of dark flowers
            Culled for pale poets' graves;
      And opiate odours load the empurpled air
    That flows and droops, a dark resplendent pall
    Under the floating wreaths funereal.

    Under the heavy midnight of thine hair
      An altar flames with spices of the south
    Burning my flesh and spirit in the flame;
    Till, looking tow'rds the land from whence I came
            I find no comfort there,
      And all the darkness to my thirsty mouth
    Is fire, but always and in every place
    Blossoms the secret wonder of thy face.

       *   *   *   *

    The walls, the very walls are woven of dreams,
      All undefined by blasphemies of art!
    Here, pure from finite hues the very night
    Conceives the mystic harmonies of light,
            Delicious glooms and gleams;
      And sorrow falls in rose-leaves on the heart,
    And pain that yearns upon the passing hour
    Is but a perfume haunting a dead flower.

    Hark, as a hammer on a coffin falls
      A knock upon the door! The colours wane,
    The dreams vanish! And leave that foul white scar,
    Tattoo'd with dreadful marks, the old calendar
            Blotching the blistered walls!
      The winter whistles thro' a shivered pane,
    And scatters on the bare boards at my feet
    These poor soiled manuscripts, torn, incomplete...

    The scent of opium floats about my breath;
      But Time resumes his dark and hideous reign;
    And, with him, hideous memories troop, I know.
    Hark, how the battered clock ticks, to and fro,--
        _Life, Death--Life, Death--Life, Death_--
      O fool to cry! O slave to bow to pain,
    Coward to live thus tortured with desire
    By demon nerves in hells of sensual fire.




THE MYSTIC


    With wounds out-reddening every moon-washed rose
    King Love went thro' earth's garden-close!
      From that first gate of birth in the golden gloom,
    I traced Him. Thorns had frayed His garment's hem,
    Ay, and His flesh! I marked, I followed them
      Down to that threshold of--the tomb?

    And there Love vanished, yet I entered! Night
    And Doubt mocked at the dwindling light:
      Strange claw-like hands flung me their shadowy hate.
    I clomb the dreadful stairways of desire
    Between a thousand eyes and wings of fire
      And knocked upon the second Gate.

    The second Gate! When, like a warrior helmed,
    In battle on battle overwhelmed,
      My soul lay stabbed by all the swords of sense,
    Blinded and stunned by stars and flowers and trees,
    Did I not struggle to my bended knees
      And wrestle with Omnipotence?

    Did earth not flee before me, when the breath
    Of worship smote her with strange death,
      Withered her gilded garment, broke her sword,
    Shattered her graven images and smote
    All her light sorrows thro' the breast and throat
      Whose death-cry crowned me God and Lord?

    Yea, God and Lord! Had tears not purged my sight?
    I saw the myriad gates of Light
      Opening and shutting in each way-side flower,
    And like a warder in the gleam of each,
    Death, whispering in some strange eternal speech
      To every passing hour.

    The second Gate? Was I not born to pass
    A million? Though the skies be brass
      And the earth iron, shall I not win thro' all?
    Shall I who made the infinite heavens my mark
    Shrink from this first wild horror of the dark,
      These formless gulfs, these glooms that crawl?

    Never was mine that easy faithless hope
    Which makes all life one flowery slope
      To heaven! Mine be the vast assaults of doom,
    Trumpets, defeats, red anguish, age-long strife,
    Ten million deaths, ten million gates to life,
      The insurgent heart that bursts the tomb.

    Vain, vain, unutterably vain are all
    The sights and sounds that sink and fall,
      The words and symbols of this fleeting breath:
    Shall I not drown the finite in the Whole,
    Cast off this body and complete my soul
      Thro' deaths beyond this gate of death?

    It will not open! Through the bars I see
    The glory and the mystery
      Wind upward ever! The earth-dawn breaks! I bleed
    With beating here for entrance. Hark, O hark,
    Love, Love, return and give me the great Dark,
      Which is the Light of Life indeed.




THE FLOWER OF OLD JAPAN

_DEDICATED TO CAROL, A LITTLE MAIDEN Of MYAKO._


PERSONS OF THE TALE

    OURSELVES
    THE TALL THIN MAN
    THE DWARF BEHIND THE TWISTED PEAR-TREE
    CREEPING SIN
    THE MAD MOONSHEE
    THE NAMELESS ONE

Pirates, Mandarins, Bonzes, Priests, Jugglers, Merchants, Ghastroi,
Weirdrians, etc.


PRELUDE

    You that have known the wonder zone
      Of islands far away;
    You that have heard the dinky bird
    And roamed in rich Cathay;
    You that have sailed o'er unknown seas
    To woods of Amfalula trees
    Where craggy dragons play:
    Oh, girl or woman, boy or man,
    You've plucked the Flower of Old Japan!

    Do you remember the blue stream;
    The bridge of pale bamboo;
    The path that seemed a twisted dream
    Where everything came true;
    The purple cherry-trees; the house
    With jutting eaves below the boughs;
    The mandarins in blue,
    With tiny, tapping, tilted toes,
    And curious curved mustachios?

    _The road to Old Japan!_ you cry,
      _And is it far or near?_
    Some never find it till they die;
      Some find it everywhere;
    The road where restful Time forgets
    His weary thoughts and wild regrets
      And calls the golden year
    Back in a fairy dream to smile
    On young and old a little while.

    Some seek it with a blazing sword,
      And some with old blue plates;
    Some with a miser's golden hoard;
      Some with a book of dates;
    Some with a box of paints; a few
    Whose loads of truth would ne'er pass through
      The first, white, fairy gates;
    And, oh, how shocked they are to find
    That truths are false when left behind!

    Do you remember all the tales
      That Tusitala told,
    When first we plunged thro' purple vales
      In quest of buried gold?
    Do you remember how he said
    That if we fell and hurt our head
      Our hearts must still be bold,
    And we must never mind the pain
    But rise up and go on again?

    Do you remember? Yes; I know
      You must remember still:
    He left us, not so long ago,
      Carolling with a will,
    Because he knew that he should lie
    Under the comfortable sky
      Upon a lonely hill,
    In Old Japan, when day was done;
    "Dear Robert Louis Stevenson."

    And there he knew that he should find
      The hills that haunt us now;
    The whaups that cried upon the wind
      His heart remembered how;
    And friends he loved and left, to roam
    Far from the pleasant hearth of home,
      Should touch his dreaming brow;
    Where fishes fly and birds have fins,
    And children teach the mandarins.

    Ah, let us follow, follow far
      Beyond the purple seas;
    Beyond the rosy foaming bar,
      The coral reef, the trees,
    The land of parrots, and the wild
    That rolls before the fearless child
      Its ancient mysteries:
    Onward and onward, if we can,
    To Old Japan--to Old Japan.


PART I

EMBARKATION

    When the firelight, red and clear,
      Flutters in the black wet pane,
    It is very good to hear
      Howling winds and trotting rain:
    It is very good indeed,
      When the nights are dark and cold,
    Near the friendly hearth to read
      Tales of ghosts and buried gold.

    So with cozy toes and hands
      We were dreaming, just like you;
    Till we thought of palmy lands
      Coloured like a cockatoo;
    All in drowsy nursery nooks
      Near the clutching fire we sat,
    Searching quaint old story-books
      Piled upon the furry mat.

    Something haunted us that night
      Like a half-remembered name;
    Worn old pages in that light
      Seemed the same, yet not the same:
    Curling in the pleasant heat
      Smoothly as a shell-shaped fan,
    O, they breathed and smelt so sweet
      When we turned to Old Japan!

    Suddenly we thought we heard
      Someone tapping on the wall,
    Tapping, tapping like a bird.
      Then a panel seemed to fall
    Quietly; and a tall thin man
      Stepped into the glimmering room,
    And he held a little fan,
      And he waved it in the gloom.

    Curious red, and golds, and greens
      Danced before our startled eyes,
    Birds from painted Indian screens,
      Beads, and shells, and dragon-flies;
    Wings, and flowers, and scent, and flame,
      Fans and fish and heliotrope;
    Till the magic air became
      Like a dream kaleidoscope.

    Then he told us of a land
      Far across a fairy sea;
    And he waved his thin white hand
      Like a flower, melodiously;
    While a red and blue macaw
      Perched upon his pointed head,
    And as in a dream, we saw
      All the curious things he said.

    Tucked in tiny palanquins,
      Magically swinging there,
    Flowery-kirtled mandarins
      Floated through the scented air;
    Wandering dogs and prowling cats
      Grinned at fish in painted lakes;
    Cross-legged conjurers on mats
      Fluted low to listening snakes.

    Fat black bonzes on the shore
      Watched where singing, faint and far,
    Boys in long blue garments bore
      Roses in a golden jar.
    While at carven dragon ships
      Floating o'er that silent sea,
    Squat-limbed gods with dreadful lips
      Leered and smiled mysteriously.

    Like an idol, shrined alone,
      Watched by secret oval eyes,
    Where the ruby wishing-stone
      Smouldering in the darkness lies,
    Anyone that wanted things
      Touched the jewel and they came;
    We were wealthier than kings
      Could we only do the same.

    Yes; we knew a hundred ways
      We might use it if we could;
    To be happy all our days
      As an Indian in a wood;
    No more daily lesson task,
      No more sorrow, no more care;
    So we thought that we would ask
      If he'd kindly lead us there.

    Ah, but then he waved his fan,
      Laughed and vanished through the wall;
    Yet as in a dream, we ran
      Tumbling after, one and all;
    Never pausing once to think,
      Panting after him we sped;
    Far away his robe of pink
      Floated backward as he fled.

    Down a secret passage deep,
      Under roofs of spidery stairs,
    Where the bat-winged nightmares creep,
      And a sheeted phantom glares
    Rushed we; ah, how strange it was
      Where no human watcher stood;
    Till we reached a gate of glass
      Opening on a flowery wood.

    Where the rose-pink robe had flown,
      Borne by swifter feet than ours,
    On to Wonder-Wander town,
      Through the wood of monstrous flowers;
    Mailed in monstrous gold and blue
      Dragon-flies like peacocks fled;
    Butterflies like carpets, too,
      Softly fluttered overhead.

    Down the valley, tip-a-toe,
      Where the broad-limbed giants lie
    Snoring, as when long ago
      Jack on a bean-stalk scaled the sky;
    On to Wonder-Wander town
      Stole we past old dreams again,
    Castles long since battered down,
      Dungeons of forgotten pain.

    Noonday brooded on the wood,
      Evening caught us ere we crept
    Where a twisted pear-tree stood,
      And a dwarf behind it slept;
    Round his scraggy throat he wore,
      Knotted tight, a scarlet scarf;
    Timidly we watched him snore,
      For he seemed a surly dwarf.

    Yet, he looked so very small,
      He could hardly hurt us much;
    We were nearly twice as tall,
      So we woke him with a touch
    Gently, and in tones polite,
      Asked him to direct our path;
    O, his wrinkled eyes grew bright
      Green with ugly gnomish wrath.

        He seemed to choke,
        And gruffly spoke,
    "You're lost: deny it, if you can!
        You want to know
        The way to go?
    There's no such place as Old Japan.

        "You want to seek--
        No, no, don't speak!
    You mean you want to steal a fan.
        You want to see
        The fields of tea?
    They don't grow tea in Old Japan.

        "In China, well
        Perhaps you'd smell
    The cherry bloom: that's if you ran
        A million miles
        And jumped the stiles,
    And never dreamed of Old Japan.

        "What, palanquins,
        And mandarins?
    And, what d'you say, a blue divan?
        And what? Hee! hee!
        You'll never see
    A pig-tailed head in Old Japan.

        "You'd take away
        The ruby, hey?
    I never heard of such a plan!
        Upon my word
        It's quite absurd
    There's not a gem in Old Japan!

        "Oh, dear me, no!
        You'd better go
    Straight home again, my little man:
        Ah, well, you'll see
        But don't blame me;
    I don't believe in Old Japan."

    Then, before we could obey,
      O'er our startled heads he cast,
    Spider-like, a webby grey
      Net that held us prisoned fast;
    How we screamed, he only grinned,
      It was such a lonely place;
    And he said we should be pinned
      Safely in his beetle-case.

    Out he dragged a monstrous box
      From a cave behind the tree!
    It had four-and-twenty locks,
      But he could not find the key,
    And his face grew very pale
      When a sudden voice began
    Drawing nearer through the vale,
      Singing songs of Old Japan,


SONG

    _Satin sails in a crimson dawn
      Over the silky silver sea;
    Purple veils of the dark withdrawn;
      Heavens of pearl and porphyry;
    Purple and white in the morning light
      Over the water the town we knew,
    In tiny state, like a willow-plate,
      Shone, and behind it the hills were blue._

    _There, we remembered, the shadows pass
      All day long like dreams in the night;
    There, in the meadows of dim blue grass,
      Crimson daisies are ringed with white.
    There the roses flutter their petals,
      Over the meadows they take their flight,
    There the moth that sleepily settles
      Turns to a flower in the warm soft light._

    _There when the sunset colours the streets
      Everyone buys at wonderful stalls
    Toys and chocolates, guns and sweets,
      Ivory pistols, and Persian shawls:
    Everyone's pockets are crammed with gold;
      Nobody's heart is worn with care,
    Nobody ever grows tired and old,
      And nobody calls you "Baby" there._

    _There with a hat like a round white dish
      Upside down on each pig-tailed head,
    Jugglers offer you snakes and fish,
      Dreams and dragons and gingerbread;
    Beautiful books with marvellous pictures,
      Painted pirates and streaming gore,
    And everyone reads, without any strictures,
      Tales he remembers for evermore._

    _There when the dim blue daylight lingers
      Listening, and the West grows holy,
    Singers crouch with their long white fingers
      Floating over the zithern slowly:
    Paper lamps with a peachy bloom
      Burn above on the dim blue bough,
    While the zitherns gild the gloom
      With curious music! I hear it now!_

    _Now_: and at that mighty word
      Holding out his magic fan,
    Through the waving flowers appeared,
      Suddenly, the tall thin man:
    And we saw the crumpled dwarf
      Trying to hide behind the tree,
    But his knotted scarlet scarf
      Made him very plain to see.

    Like a soft and smoky cloud
      Passed the webby net away;
    While its owner squealing loud
      Down behind the pear-tree lay;
    For the tall thin man came near,
      And his words were dark and gruff,
    And he swung the dwarf in the air
      By his long and scraggy scruff.

    There he kickled whimpering.
      But our rescuer touched the box,
    Open with a sudden spring
      Clashed the four-and-twenty locks;
    Then he crammed the dwarf inside,
      And the locks all clattered tight:
    Four-and-twenty times he tried
      Whether they were fastened right.

    Ah, he led us on our road,
      Showed us Wonder-Wander town;
    Then he fled: behind him flowed
      Once again the rose-pink gown:
    Down the long deserted street,
      All the windows winked like eyes,
    And our little trotting feet
      Echoed to the starry skies.

    Low and long for evermore
      Where the Wonder-Wander sea
    Whispers to the wistful shore
      Purple songs of mystery,
    Down the shadowy quay we came--
      Though it hides behind the hill
    You will find it just the same
      And the seamen singing still.

    There we chose a ship of pearl,
      And her milky silken sail
    Seemed by magic to unfurl,
      Puffed before a fairy gale;
    Shimmering o'er the purple deep,
      Out across the silvery bar,
    Softly as the wings of sleep
      Sailed we towards the morning star.

    Over us the skies were dark,
      Yet we never needed light;
    Softly shone our tiny bark
      Gliding through the solemn night;
    Softly bright our moony gleam,
      Glimmered o'er the glistening waves,
    Like a cold sea-maiden's dream
      Globed in twilit ocean caves.

    So all night our shallop passed
      Many a haunt of old desire,
    Blurs of savage blossom massed
      Red above a pirate-fire;
    Huts that gloomed and glanced among
      Fruitage dipping in the blue;
    Songs the sirens never sung,
      Shores Ulysses never knew.

    All our fairy rigging shone
      Richly as a rainbow seen
    Where the moonlight floats upon
      Gossamers of gold and green:
    All the tiny spars were bright;
      Beaten gold the bowsprit was;
    But our pilot was the night,
      And our chart a looking-glass.


PART II

THE ARRIVAL

    With rosy finger-tips the Dawn
      Drew back the silver veils,
    Till lilac shimmered into lawn
      Above the satin sails;
    And o'er the waters, white and wan,
      In tiny patterned state,
    We saw the streets of Old Japan
      Shine, like a willow plate.

    O, many a milk-white pigeon roams
      The purple cherry crops,
    The mottled miles of pearly domes,
      And blue pagoda tops,
    The river with its golden canes
      And dark piratic dhows,
    To where beyond the twisting vanes
      The burning mountain glows.

    A snow-peak in the silver skies
      Beyond that magic world,
    We saw the great volcano rise
      With incense o'er it curled,
    Whose tiny thread of rose and blue
      Has risen since time began,
    Before the first enchanter knew
      The peak of Old Japan.

    Nobody watched us quietly steer
    The pinnace to the painted pier,
      Except one pig-tailed mandarin,
    Who sat upon a chest of tea
    Pretending not to hear or see!...
      His hands were very long and thin,
    His face was very broad and white;
    And O, it was a fearful sight
      To see him sit alone and grin!

    His grin was very sleek and sly:
    Timidly we passed him by.
      He did not seem at all to care:
    So, thinking we were safely past,
    We ventured to look back at last.
      O, dreadful blank!--_He was not there!_
    He must have hid behind his chest:
    We did not stay to see the rest.

    But, as in reckless haste we ran,
    We came upon the tall thin man,
    Who called to us and waved his fan,
      And offered us his palanquin:
    He said we must not go alone
    To seek the ruby wishing-stone,
      Because the white-faced mandarin
    Would dog our steps for many a mile,
    And sit upon each purple stile
    Before we came to it, and smile
      And smile; his name was Creeping Sin.

    He played with children's beating hearts,
    And stuck them full of poisoned darts
      And long green thorns that stabbed and stung:
    He'd watch until we tried to speak,
    Then thrust inside his pasty cheek
      His long, white, slimy tongue:
    And smile at everything we said;
    And sometimes pat us on the head,
      And say that we were very young:
    He was a cousin of the man
    Who said that there was no Japan.

    And night and day this Creeping Sin
    Would follow the path of the palanquin;
      Yet if we still were fain to touch
    The ruby, we must have no fear,
    Whatever we might see or hear,
    And the tall thin man would take us there;
      He did not fear that Sly One much,
    Except perhaps on a moonless night,
    Nor even then if the stars were bright.

    So, in the yellow palankeen
    We swung along in state between
    Twinkling domes of gold and green
      Through the rich bazaar,
    Where the cross-legged merchants sat,
    Old and almond-eyed and fat,
    Each upon a gorgeous mat,
      Each in a cymar;
    Each in crimson samite breeches,
    Watching his barbaric riches.

    Cherry blossom breathing sweet
    Whispered o'er the dim blue street
    Where with fierce uncertain feet
      Tawny pirates walk:
    All in belts and baggy blouses,
    Out of dreadful opium houses,
    Out of dens where Death carouses,
      Horribly they stalk;
    Girt with ataghan and dagger,
    Right across the road they swagger.

    And where the cherry orchards blow,
    We saw the maids of Miyako,
    Swaying softly to and fro
      Through the dimness of the dance:
    Like sweet thoughts that shine through dreams
    They glided, wreathing rosy gleams,
    With stately sounds of silken streams,
      And many a slim kohl-lidded glance;
    Then fluttered with tiny rose-bud feet
    To a soft _frou-frou_ and a rhythmic beat
    As the music shimmered, pursuit, retreat,
      "Hands across, retire, advance!"
    And again it changed and the glimmering throng
    Faded into a distant song.


SONG

        _The maidens of Miyako
          Dance in the sunset hours,
        Deep in the sunset glow,
          Under the cherry flowers._

        _With dreamy hands of pearl
          Floating like butterflies,
        Dimly the dancers whirl
          As the rose-light dies;_

        _And their floating gowns, their hair
          Upbound with curious pins,
        Fade thro' the darkening air
          With the dancing mandarins._

    And then, as we went, the tall thin man
    Explained the manners of Old Japan;
      If you pitied a thing, you pretended to sneer;
    Yet if you were glad you ran to buy
    A captive pigeon and let it fly;
      And, if you were sad, you took a spear
    To wound yourself, for fear your pain
    Should quietly grow less again.

    And, again he said, if we wished to find
    The mystic City that enshrined
      The stone so few on earth had found,
    We must be very brave; it lay
    A hundred haunted leagues away,
      Past many a griffon-guarded ground,
    In depths of dark and curious art,
    Where passion-flowers enfold apart
    The Temple of the Flaming Heart,
      The City of the Secret Wound.

    About the fragrant fall of day
    We saw beside the twisted way
      A blue-domed tea-house, bossed with gold;
    Hungry and thirsty we entered in,
    How should we know what Creeping Sin
      Had breathed in that Emperor's ear who sold
    His own dumb soul for an evil jewel
    To the earth-gods, blind and ugly and cruel?
      We drank sweet tea as his tale was told,
    In a garden of blue chrysanthemums,
    While a drowsy swarming of gongs and drums
      Out of the sunset dreamily rolled.

    But, as the murmur nearer drew,
    A fat black bonze, in a robe of blue,
      Suddenly at the gate appeared;
    And close behind, with that evil grin,
    _Was it Creeping Sin, was it Creeping Sin?_
      The bonze looked quietly down and sneered.
    Our guide! Was he sleeping? We could not wake him.
    However we tried to pinch and shake him!

    Nearer, nearer the tumult came,
    Till, as a glare of sound and flame,
      Blind from a terrible furnace door
    Blares, or the mouth of a dragon, blazed
    The seething gateway: deaf and dazed
      With the clanging and the wild uproar
    We stood; while a thousand oval eyes
    Gapped our fear with a sick surmise.

    Then, as the dead sea parted asunder,
    The clamour clove with a sound of thunder
      In two great billows; and all was quiet.
    Gaunt and black was the palankeen
    That came in dreadful state between
      The frozen waves of the wild-eyed riot
    Curling back from the breathless track
    Of the Nameless One who is never seen:
      The close drawn curtains were thick and black;
    But wizen and white was the tall thin man
      As he rose in his sleep:
    His eyes were closed, his lips were wan,
      He crouched like a leopard that dares not leap.

    The bearers halted: the tall thin man,
    Fearfully dreaming, waved his fan,
      With wizard fingers, to and fro;
    While, with a whimper of evil glee,
    The Nameless Emperor's mad Moonshee
      Stepped in front of us: dark and slow
    Were the words of the doom that he dared not name;
    But, over the ground, as he spoke there came
    Tiny circles of soft blue flame;
      Like ghosts of flowers they began to glow,
    And flow like a moonlit brook between
    Our feet and the terrible palankeen.

    But the Moonshee wrinkled his long thin eyes,
    And sneered, "Have you stolen the strength of the skies?
      Then pour before us a stream of pearl!
    Give us the pearl and the gold we know,
    And our hearts will be softened and let you go;
      But these are toys for a foolish girl--
    These vanishing blossoms--what are they worth?
    They are not so heavy as dust and earth:
      Pour before us a stream of pearl!"

    Then, with a wild strange laugh, our guide
    Stretched his arms to the West and cried
      Once, and a song came over the sea;
    And all the blossoms of moon-soft fire
    Woke and breathed as a wind-swept lyre,
      And the garden surged into harmony;
    Till it seemed that the soul of the whole world sung,
    And every petal became a tongue
      To tell the thoughts of Eternity.

    But the Moonshee lifted his painted brows
    And stared at the gold on the blue tea-house:
      "Can you clothe your body with dreams?" he sneered;
    "If you taught us the truths that we always know
    Our heart might be softened and let you go:
      Can you tell us the length of a monkey's beard,
    Or the weight of the gems on the Emperor's fan,
    Or the number of parrots in Old Japan?"

    And again, with a wild strange laugh, our guide
    Looked at him; and he shrunk aside,
      Shrivelling like a flame-touched leaf;
    For the red-cross blossoms of soft blue fire
    Were growing and fluttering higher and higher,
      Shaking their petals out, sheaf by sheaf,
    Till with disks like shields and stems like towers
    Burned the host of the passion-flowers
        ... Had the Moonshee flown like a midnight thief?
      ... Yet a thing like a monkey, shrivelled and black,
    Chattered and danced as they forced him back.

    As the coward chatters for empty pride,
      In the face of a foe that he cannot but fear,
    It chattered and leapt from side to side,
      And its voice rang strangely upon the ear.
    As the cry of a wizard that dares not own
    Another's brighter and mightier throne;
    As the wrath of a fool that rails aloud
      On the fire that burnt him; the brazen bray
    Clamoured and sang o'er the gaping crowd,
      And flapped like a gabbling goose away.


THE CRY OF THE MAD MOONSHEE

        _If the blossoms were beans,
        I should know what it means--
    This blaze, which I certainly cannot endure;
        It is evil, too,
        For its colour is blue,
    And the sense of the matter is quite obscure.
        Celestial truth
        _Is the food of youth;
    But the music was dark as a moonless night.
        The facts in the song
        Were all of them wrong,_

    _And there was not a single sum done right;
    Tho' a metaphysician amongst the crowd,
    In a voice that was notably deep and loud,
    Repeated, as fast as he was able,
    The whole of the multiplication table._

    So the cry flapped off as a wild goose flies,
    And the stars came out in the trembling skies,
      And ever the mystic glory grew
    In the garden of blue chrysanthemums,
    Till there came a rumble of distant drums;
      And the multitude suddenly turned and flew.
    ... A dead ape lay where their feet had been ...
    And we called for the yellow palankeen,
      And the flowers divided and let us through.

    The black-barred moon was large and low
    When we came to the Forest of Ancient Woe;
      And over our heads the stars were bright.
    But through the forest the path we travelled
    Its phosphorescent aisle unravelled
      In one thin ribbon of dwindling light:
    And twice and thrice on the fainting track
    We paused to listen. The moon grew black,
      But the coolies' faces glimmered white,
    As the wild woods echoed in dreadful chorus
    A laugh that came horribly hopping o'er us
      Like monstrous frogs thro' the murky night.

    Then the tall thin man as we swung along
    Sang us an old enchanted song
      That lightened our hearts of their fearful load.
    But, e'en as the moonlit air grew sweet,
    We heard the pad of stealthy feet
      Dogging us down the thin white road;
    And the song grew weary again and harsh,
    And the black trees dripped like the fringe of a marsh,
      And a laugh crept out like a shadowy toad;
    And we knew it was neither ghoul nor djinn:
    _It was Creeping Sin! It was Creeping Sin!_

    But we came to a bend, and the white moon glowed
    Like a gate at the end of the narrowing road
      Far away; and on either hand,
    As guards of a path to the heart's desire,
    The strange tall blossoms of soft blue fire
      Stretched away thro' that unknown land,
    League on league with their dwindling lane
    Down to the large low moon; and again
    There shimmered around us that mystical strain,
      In a tongue that it seemed we could understand.


SONG

    _Hold by right and rule by fear
    Till the slowly broadening sphere
    Melting through the skies above
    Merge into the sphere of love._

    _Hold by might until you find
    Might is powerless o'er the mind:
    Hold by Truth until you see,
    Though they bow before the wind,
    Its towers can mock at liberty._

    _Time, the seneschal, is blind;
    Time is blind: and what are we?
    Captives of Infinity,
    Claiming through Truth's prison bars
    Kinship with the wandering stars._

    O, who could tell the wild weird sights
    We saw in all the days and nights
      We travelled through those forests old.
    We saw the griffons on white cliffs,
    Among fantastic hieroglyphs,
      Guarding enormous heaps of gold:

    We saw the Ghastroi--curious men
    Who dwell, like tigers, in a den,
      And howl whene'er the moon is cold;
    They stripe themselves with red and black
    And ride upon the yellow Yak.

    Their dens are always ankle-deep
    With twisted knives, and in their sleep
      They often cut themselves; they say
    That if you wish to live in peace
    The surest way is not to cease
      Collecting knives; and never a day
    Can pass, unless they buy a few;
    And as their enemies buy them too
      They all avert the impending fray,
    And starve their children and their wives
    To buy the necessary knives.

       *   *   *   *

    The forest leapt with shadowy shapes
    As we came to the great black Tower of Apes:
    But we gave them purple figs and grapes
      In alabaster amphoras:
    We gave them curious kinds of fruit
    With betel nuts and orris-root,
      And then they let us pass:
    And when we reached the Tower of Snakes
    We gave them soft white honey-cakes,
      And warm sweet milk in bowls of brass:
    And on the hundredth eve we found
    The City of the Secret Wound.

    We saw the mystic blossoms blow
    Round the City, far below;
    Faintly in the sunset glow
    We saw the soft blue glory flow
      O'er many a golden garden gate:
    And o'er the tiny dark green seas
    Of tamarisks and tulip-trees,
    Domes like golden oranges
      Dream aloft elate.

    And clearer, clearer as we went,
    We heard from tower and battlement
    A whisper, like a warning, sent
      From watchers out of sight;
    And clearer, brighter, as we drew
    Close to the walls, we saw the blue
    Flashing of plumes where peacocks flew
      Thro' zones of pearly light.

    On either side, a fat black bonze
    Guarded the gates of red-wrought bronze,
    Blazoned with blue sea-dragons
      And mouths of yawning flame;
    Down the road of dusty red,
    Though their brown feet ached and bled,
    Our coolies went with joyful tread:
    Like living fans the gates outspread
      And opened as we came.


PART III

THE MYSTIC RUBY

    The white moon dawned; the sunset died;
    And stars were trembling when we spied
      The rose-red temple of our dreams:
    Its lamp-lit gardens glimmered cool
    With many an onyx-paven pool,
      Amid soft sounds of flowing streams;
    Where star-shine shimmered through the white
    Tall fountain-shafts of crystal light
      In ever changing rainbow-gleams.

    Priests in flowing yellow robes
    Glided under rosy globes
      Through the green pomegranate boughs
    Moonbeams poured their coloured rain;
    Roofs of sea-green porcelain
      Jutted o'er the rose-red house;
    Bells were hung beneath its eaves;
    Every wind that stirred the leaves
      Tinkled as tired water does.

    The temple had a low broad base
    Of black bright marble; all its face
      Was marble bright in rosy bloom;
    And where two sea-green pillars rose
    Deep in the flower-soft eave-shadows
      We saw, thro' richly sparkling gloom,
    Wrought in marvellous years of old
    With bulls and peacocks bossed in gold,
      The doors of powdered lacquer loom.

    Quietly then the tall thin man,
    Holding his turquoise-tinted fan,
      Alighted from the palanquin;
    We followed: never painter dreamed
    Of how that dark rich temple gleamed
      With gules of jewelled gloom within;
    And as we wondered near the door
    A priest came o'er the polished floor
      In sandals of soft serpent-skin;
    His mitre shimmered bright and blue
    With pigeon's breast-plumes. When he knew
      Our quest he stroked his broad white chin,
    And looked at us with slanting eyes
    And smiled; then through his deep disguise
    _We knew him! It was Creeping Sin!_

    But cunningly he bowed his head
    Down on his gilded breast and said
      _Come_: and he led us through the dusk
    Of passages whose painted walls
    Gleamed with dark old festivals;
      Till where the gloom grew sweet with musk
    And incense, through a door of amber
    We came into a high-arched chamber.

    There on a throne of jasper sat
    A monstrous idol, black and fat;
      Thick rose-oil dropped upon its head:
    Drop by drop, heavy and sweet,
    Trickled down to its ebon feet
      Whereon the blood of goats was shed,
    And smeared around its perfumed knees
    In savage midnight mysteries.

    It wore about its bulging waist
    A belt of dark green bronze enchased
      With big, soft, cloudy pearls; its wrists
    Were clasped about with moony gems
    Gathered from dead kings' diadems;
      Its throat was ringed with amethysts,
    And in its awful hand it held
    A softly smouldering emerald.

    Silkily murmured Creeping Sin,
    "This is the stone you wished to win!"
      "White Snake," replied the tall thin man,
    "Show us the Ruby Stone, or I
    Will slay thee with my hands." The sly
      Long eyelids of the priest began
    To slant aside; and then once more
    He led us through the fragrant door.

    And now along the passage walls
    Were painted hideous animals,
      With hooded eyes and cloven stings:
    In the incense that like shadowy hair
    Streamed over them they seemed to stir
      Their craggy claws and crooked wings.
    At last we saw strange moon-wreaths curl
    Around a deep, soft porch of pearl.

    O, what enchanter wove in dreams
    That chapel wild with shadowy gleams
      And prismy colours of the moon?
    Shrined like a rainbow in a mist
    Of flowers, the fretted amethyst
      Arches rose to a mystic tune;
    And never mortal art inlaid
    Those cloudy floors of sea-soft jade.

    There, in the midst, an idol rose
    White as the silent starlit snows
      On lonely Himalayan heights:
    Over its head the spikenard spilled
    Down to its feet, with myrrh distilled
      In distant, odorous Indian nights:
    It held before its ivory face
    A flaming yellow chrysoprase.

    O, silkily murmured Creeping Sin,
    "This is the stone you wished to win."
      But in his ear the tall thin man
    _Whispered with slow, strange lips_--we knew
    Not what, but Creeping Sin went blue
      With fear; again his eyes began
    To slant aside; then through the porch
    He passed, and lit a tall, brown torch.

    Down a corridor dark as death,
    With beating hearts and bated breath
      We hurried; far away we heard
    A dreadful hissing, fierce as fire
    When rain begins to quench a pyre;
      And where the smoky torch-light flared
    Strange vermin beat their bat-like wings,
    And the wet walls dropped with slimy things.

    And darker, darker, wound the way,
    Beyond all gleams of night and day,
      And still that hideous hissing grew
    Louder and louder on our ears,
    And tortured us with eyeless fears;
      Then suddenly the gloom turned blue,
    And, in the wall, a rough rock cave
    Gaped, like a phosphorescent grave.

    And from the purple mist within
    There came a wild tumultuous din
      Of snakes that reared their heads and hissed
    As if a witch's cauldron boiled;
    All round the door great serpents coiled,
      With eyes of glowing amethyst,
    Whose fierce blue flames began to slide
    Like shooting stars from side to side.

    Ah! with a sickly gasping grin
    And quivering eyelids, Creeping Sin
      Stole to the cave; but, suddenly,
    As through its glimmering mouth he passed,
    The serpents flashed and gripped him fast:
      He wriggled and gave one awful cry,
    Then all at once the cave was cleared;
    The snakes with their victim had disappeared.

    And fearlessly the tall thin man
    Opened his turquoise-tinted fan
      And entered; and the mists grew bright,
    And we saw that the cave was a diamond hall
    Lit with lamps for a festival.
      A myriad globes of coloured light
    Went gliding deep in its massy sides,
    Like the shimmering moons in the glassy tides
      Where a sea-king's palace enchants the night.

    Gliding and flowing, a glory and wonder,
    Through each other, and over, and under,
      The lucent orbs of green and gold,
    Bright with sorrow or soft with sleep,
    In music through the glimmering deep,
      Over their secret axles rolled,
    And circled by the murmuring spheres
    We saw in a frame of frozen tears
      A mirror that made the blood run cold.

    For, when we came to it, we found
    It imaged everything around
      Except the face that gazed in it;
    And where the mirrored face should be
    A heart-shaped Ruby fierily
      Smouldered; and round the frame was writ,
    _Mystery: Time and Tide shall pass,
    I am the Wisdom Looking-Glass._

    _This is the Ruby none can touch:
    Many have loved it overmuch;
      Its fathomless fires flutter and sigh,
    Being as images of the flame
    That shall make earth and heaven the same
      When the fire of the end reddens the sky,
    And the world consumes like a burning pall,
    Till where there is nothing, there is all._

    So we looked up at the tall thin man
    And we saw that his face grew sad and wan:
      Tears were glistening in his eyes:
    At last, with a breaking sob, he bent
    His head upon his breast and went
      Swiftly away! With dreadful cries
    We rushed to the softly glimmering door
    And stared at the hideous corridor.
      But his robe was gone as a dream that flies:
    Back to the glass in terror we came,
    And stared at the writing round the frame.

    We could not understand one word:
    And suddenly we thought we heard
      The hissing of the snakes again:
    How could we front them all alone?
    O, madly we clutched at the mirrored stone
      And wished we were back on the flowery plain:
    And swifter than thought and swift as fear
    The whole world flashed, and behold we were there.

    Yes; there was the port of Old Japan,
    With its twisted patterns, white and wan,
    Shining like a mottled fan
      Spread by the blue sea, faint and far;
    And far away we heard once more
    A sound of singing on the shore,
    Where boys in blue kimonos bore
      Roses in a golden jar:
    And we heard, where the cherry orchards blow,
    The serpent-charmers fluting low,
    And the song of the maidens of Miyako.

    And at our feet unbroken lay
    The glass that had whirled us thither away:
      And in the grass, among the flowers
    We sat and wished all sorts of things:
    O, we were wealthier than kings!
      We ruled the world for several hours!
    And then, it seemed, we knew not why,
    All the daisies began to die.

    We wished them alive again; but soon
    The trees all fled up towards the moon
      Like peacocks through the sunlit air:
    And the butterflies flapped into silver fish;
    And each wish spoiled another wish;
      Till we threw the glass down in despair;
    For, getting whatever you want to get,
    Is like drinking tea from a fishing net.

    At last we thought we'd wish once more
    That all should be as it was before;
      And then we'd shatter the glass, if we could;
    But just as the world grew right again,
    We heard a wanderer out on the plain
      Singing what none of us understood;
    Yet we thought that the world grew thrice more sweet
    And the meadows were blossoming under his feet.

    And we felt a grand and beautiful fear,
    For we knew that a marvellous thought drew near;
      So we kept the glass for a little while:
    And the skies grew deeper and twice as bright,
    And the seas grew soft as a flower of light,
      And the meadows rippled from stile to stile;
    And memories danced in a musical throng
    Thro' the blossom that scented the wonderful song.


SONG

    _We sailed across the silver seas
      And saw the sea-blue bowers,
    We saw the purple cherry trees,
      And all the foreign flowers,
    We travelled in a palanquin
      Beyond the caravan,
    And yet our hearts had never seen
      The Flower of Old Japan._

    _The Flower above all other flowers,
      The Flower that never dies;
    Before whose throne the scented hours
      Offer their sacrifice;
    The Flower that here on earth below
      Reveals the heavenly plan;
    But only little children know
      The Flower of Old Japan._

    There, in the dim blue flowery plain
    We wished with the magic glass again
      To go to the Flower of the song's desire:
    And o'er us the whole of the soft blue sky
    Flashed like fire as the world went by,
      And far beneath us the sea like fire
    Flashed in one swift blue brilliant stream,
    And the journey was done, like a change in a dream.


PART IV

THE END OF THE QUEST

    Like the dawn upon a dream
      Slowly through the scented gloom
    Crept once more the ruddy gleam
      O'er the friendly nursery room.
    There, before our waking eyes,
      Large and ghostly, white and dim,
    Dreamed the Flower that never dies,
      Opening wide its rosy rim.

    Spreading like a ghostly fan,
      Petals white as porcelain,
    There the Flower of Old Japan
      Told us we were home again;
    For a soft and curious light
      Suddenly was o'er it shed.
    And we saw it was a white
      English daisy, ringed with red.

    Slowly, as a wavering mist
      Waned the wonder out of sight,
    To a sigh of amethyst,
      To a wraith of scented light.
    Flower and magic glass had gone;
      Near the clutching fire we sat
    Dreaming, dreaming, all alone,
      Each upon a furry mat.

    While the firelight, red and clear,
      Fluttered in the black wet pane,
    It was very good to hear
      Howling winds and trotting rain.
    For we found at last we knew
      More than all our fancy planned,
    All the fairy tales were true,
      And home the heart of fairyland.


EPILOGUE

    Carol, every violet has
    Heaven for a looking-glass!

    Every little valley lies
    Under many-clouded skies;
    Every little cottage stands
    Girt about with boundless lands.
    Every little glimmering pond
    Claims the mighty shores beyond--
    Shores no seamen ever hailed,
    Seas no ship has ever sailed.

    All the shores when day is done
    Fade into the setting sun,
    So the story tries to teach
    More than can be told in speech.

    Beauty is a fading flower,
    Truth is but a wizard's tower,
    Where a solemn death-bell tolls,
    And a forest round it rolls.

    We have come by curious ways
    To the Light that holds the days;
    We have sought in haunts of fear
    For that all-enfolding sphere:
    And lo! it was not far, but near.

    We have found, O foolish-fond,
    The shore that has no shore beyond.

    Deep in every heart it lies
    With its untranscended skies;
    For what heaven should bend above
    Hearts that own the heaven of love?

    Carol, Carol, we have come
    Back to heaven, back to home.




APES AND IVORY


    Apes and ivory, skulls and roses, in junks of old Hong-Kong,
    Gliding over a sea of dreams to a haunted shore of song,
    Masts of gold and sails of satin, shimmering out of the East,
    O, Love has little need of you now to make his heart a feast.

    Or is it an elephant, white as milk and bearing a severed head
    That tatters his broad soft wrinkled flank in tawdry patches of red,
    With a negro giant to walk beside and a temple dome above,
    Where ruby and emerald shatter the sun,--is it these that should
        please my love?

    Or is it a palace of pomegranates, where ivory-limbed young slaves
    Lure a luxury out of the noon in the swooning fountain's waves;
    Or couch like cats and sun themselves on the warm white marble brink?
    O, Love has little to ask of these, this day in May, I think.

    Is it Lebanon cedars or purple fruits of the honeyed southron air,
    Spikenard, saffron, roses of Sharon, cinnamon, calamus, myrrh,
    A bed of spices, a fountain of waters, or the wild white wings of
        a dove,
    Now, when the winter is over and gone, is it these that should
        please my love?

    The leaves outburst on the hazel-bough and the hawthorn's heaped
        wi' flower,
    And God has bidden the crisp clouds build my love a lordlier tower,
    Taller than Lebanon, whiter than snow, in the fresh blue skies above;
    And the wild rose wakes in the winding lanes of the radiant land
        I love.

    _Apes and ivory, skulls and roses, in junks of old Hong-Kong,
    Gliding over a sea of dreams to a haunted shore of song,
    Masts of gold and sails of satin, shimmering out of the East,
    O, Love has little need of you now to make his heart a feast._




A SONG OF SHERWOOD


    Sherwood in the twilight, is Robin Hood awake?
    Grey and ghostly shadows are gliding through the brake,
    Shadows of the dappled deer, dreaming of the morn,
    Dreaming of a shadowy man that winds a shadowy horn.

    Robin Hood is here again: all his merry thieves
    Hear a ghostly bugle-note shivering through the leaves,
    Calling as he used to call, faint and far away,
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Merry, merry England has kissed the lips of June:
    All the wings of fairyland were here beneath the moon,
    Like a flight of rose-leaves fluttering in a mist
    Of opal and ruby and pearl and amethyst.

    Merry, merry England is waking as of old,
    With eyes of blither hazel and hair of brighter gold:
    For Robin Hood is here again beneath the bursting spray
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Love is in the greenwood building him a house
    Of wild rose and hawthorn and honeysuckle boughs:
    Love is in the greenwood, dawn is in the skies,
    And Marian is waiting with a glory in her eyes.

    Hark! The dazzled laverock climbs the golden steep!
    Marian is waiting: is Robin Hood asleep?
    Round the fairy grass-rings frolic elf and fay,
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Oberon, Oberon, rake away the gold,
    Rake away the red leaves, roll away the mould,
    Rake away the gold leaves, roll away the red,
    And wake Will Scarlett from his leafy forest bed.

    Friar Tuck and Little John are riding down together
    With quarter-staff and drinking-can and grey goose-feather.
    The dead are coming back again, the years are rolled away
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.

    Softly over Sherwood the south wind blows.
    All the heart of England hid in every rose
    Hears across the greenwood the sunny whisper leap,
    Sherwood in the red dawn, is Robin Hood asleep?

    Hark, the voice of England wakes him as of old
    And, shattering the silence with a cry of brighter gold
    Bugles in the greenwood echo from the steep,
    _Sherwood in the red dawn, is Robin Hood asleep?_

    Where the deer are gliding down the shadowy glen
    All across the glades of fern he calls his merry men--
    Doublets of the Lincoln green glancing through the May
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day--

    Calls them and they answer: from aisles of oak and ash
    Rings the _Follow! Follow!_ and the boughs begin to crash,
    The ferns begin to flutter and the flowers begin to fly,
    And through the crimson dawning the robber band goes by.

    _Robin! Robin! Robin!_ All his merry thieves
    Answer as the bugle-note shivers through the leaves,
    Calling as he used to call, faint and far away,
    In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.




THE WORLD'S MAY-QUEEN


    I

    Whither away is the Spring to-day?
            To England, to England!
    In France they heard the South wind say,
    "She's off on a quest for a Queen o' the May,
    So she's over the hills far away,
            To England!"

    And why did she fly with her golden feet
            To England, to England?
    In Italy, too, they heard the sweet
    Roses whisper and flutter and beat--
    "She's an old and a true, true love to greet
            In England!"

    A moon ago there came a cry
            From England, from England,
    Faintly, fondly it faltered nigh
    The throne of the Spring in the Southern sky,
    And it whispered "Come," and the world went by,
    And with one long loving blissful sigh
            The Spring was away to England!


    II

    When Spring comes back to England
      And crowns her brows with May,
    Round the merry moonlit world
      She goes the greenwood way:
    She throws a rose to Italy,
      A fleur-de-lys to France;
    But round her regal morris-ring
      The seas of England dance.

    When Spring comes back to England
      And dons her robe of green,
    There's many a nation garlanded
      But England is the Queen;
    She's Queen, she's Queen of all the world
      Beneath the laughing sky,
    For the nations go a-Maying
      When they hear the New Year cry--

    "Come over the water to England,
      My old love, my new love,
    Come over the water to England,
      In showers of flowery rain;
    Come over the water to England,
      April, my true love;
    And tell the heart of England
      The Spring is here again!"


    III

    So it's here, she is here with her eyes of blue
            In England, In England!
    She has brought us the rainbows with her, too,
    And a glory of shimmering glimmering dew
    And a heaven of quivering scent and hue
    And a lily for me and a rose for you
            In England.

    There's many a wanderer far away
            From England, from England,
    Will toss upon his couch and say--
    Though Spain is proud and France is gay,
    And there's many a foot on the primrose way,
    The world has never a Queen o' the May
            But England.


    IV

    When Drake went out to seek for gold
      Across the uncharted sea,
    And saw the Western skies unfold
      Their veils of mystery;
    To lure him through the fevered hours
      As nigh to death he lay,
    There floated o'er the foreign flowers
      A breath of English May:

    And back to Devon shores again
      His dreaming spirit flew
    Over the splendid Spanish Main
      To haunts his childhood knew,
    Whispering "God forgive the blind
      Desire that bade me roam,
    I've sailed around the world to find
      The sweetest way to home."


    V

    And it's whither away is the Spring to-day?
            To England, to England!
    In France you'll hear the South wind say,
    "She off on a quest for a Queen o' the May,
    So she's over the hills and far away,
            To England!"

    She's flown with the swallows across the sea
            To England, to England!
    For there's many a land of the brave and free
    But never a home o' the hawthorn-tree,
    And never a Queen o' the May for me
            But England!

    And round the fairy revels whirl
            In England, in England!
    And the buds outbreak and the leaves unfurl,
    And where the crisp white cloudlets curl
    The Dawn comes up like a primrose girl
    With a crowd of flowers in a basket of pearl
            For England!




PIRATES


    Come to me, you with the laughing face, in the night as I lie
    Dreaming of days that are dead and of joys gone by;
    Come to me, comrade, come through the slow-dropping rain,
    Come from your grave in the darkness and let us be pirates again.

    Let us be boys together to-night, and pretend as of old
    We are pirates at rest in a cave among huge heaps of gold,
    Red Spanish doubloons and great pieces of eight, and muskets
        and swords,
    And a smoky red camp-fire to glint, you know how, on our
        ill-gotten hoards.

    The old cave in the fir-wood that slopes down the hills to the sea
    Still is haunted, perhaps, by young pirates as wicked as we:
    Though the fir with the magpie's big mud-plastered nest used to hide
        it so well,
    And the boys in the gang had to swear that they never would tell.

    Ah, that tree; I have sat in its boughs and looked seaward for hours.
    I remember the creak of its branches, the scent of the flowers
    That climbed round the mouth of the cave. It is odd I recall
    Those little things best, that I scarcely took heed of at all.

    I remember how brightly the brass on the butt of my spy-glass gleamed
    As I climbed through the purple heather and thyme to our eyrie
        and dreamed;
    I remember the smooth glossy sun-burn that darkened our faces
        and hands
    As we gazed at the merchantmen sailing away to those wonderful lands.

    I remember the long, slow sigh of the sea as we raced in the sun,
    To dry ourselves after our swimming; and how we would run
    With a cry and a crash through the foam as it creamed on the shore,
    Then back to bask in the warm dry gold of the sand once more.

    Come to me, you with the laughing face, in the gloom as I lie
    Dreaming of days that are dead and of joys gone by;
    Let us be boys together to-night and pretend as of old
    We are pirates at rest in a cave among great heaps of gold.

    Come; you shall be chief. We'll not quarrel, the time flies so fast.
    There are ships to be grappled, there's blood to be shed, ere our
        playtime be past.
    No; perhaps we _will_ quarrel, just once, or it scarcely will seem
    So like the old days that have flown from us both like a dream.

    Still; you shall be chief in the end; and then we'll go home
    To the hearth and the tea and the books that we loved: ah, but come,
    Come to me, come through the night and the slow-dropping rain;
    Come, old friend, come thro' the darkness and let us be playmates again.




A SONG OF ENGLAND


    There is a song of England that none shall ever sing;
                  So sweet it is and fleet it is
    That none whose words are not as fleet as birds upon the wing,
                  And regal as her mountains,
                  And radiant as the fountains
    Of rainbow-coloured sea-spray that every wave can fling
    Against the cliffs of England, the sturdy cliffs of England,
                  Could more than seem to dream of it,
                  Or catch one flying gleam of it,
    Above the seas of England that never cease to sing.

    There is a song of England that only lovers know;
                  So rare it is and fair it is,
    O, like a fairy rose it is upon a drift of snow,
                  So cold and sweet and sunny,
                  So full of hidden honey,
    So like a flight of butterflies where rose and lily blow
    Along the lanes of England, the leafy lanes of England;
                  When flowers are at their vespers
                  And full of little whispers,
    The boys and girls of England shall sing it as they go.

    There is a song of England that only love may sing,
                  So sure it is and pure it is;
    And seaward with the sea-mew it spreads a whiter wing,
                  And with the sky-lark hovers
                  Above the tryst of lovers,
    Above the kiss and whisper that led the lovely Spring
    Through all the glades of England, the ferny glades of England,
                  Until the way enwound her
                  With sprays of May, and crowned her
    With stars of frosty blossom in a merry morris-ring.

    There is a song of England that haunts her hours of rest:
                  The calm of it and balm of it
    Are breathed from every hedgerow that blushes to the West
                  From the cottage doors that nightly
                  Cast their welcome out so brightly
    On the lanes where laughing children are lifted and caressed
    By the tenderest hands in England, hard and blistered hands of England:
                  And from the restful sighing
                  Of the sleepers that are lying
    With the arms of God around them on the night's contented breast.

    There is a song of England that wanders on the wind;
                  So sad it is and glad it is
    That men who hear it madden and their eyes are wet and blind,
                  For the lowlands and the highlands
                  Of the unforgotten islands,
    For the Islands of the Blesséd and the rest they cannot find
    As they grope in dreams to England and the love they left in England;
                  Little feet that danced to meet them
                  And the lips that used to greet them,
    And the watcher at the window in the home they left behind.

    There is a song of England that thrills the beating blood
                  With burning cries and yearning
    Tides of hidden aspiration hardly known or understood;
                  Aspirations of the creature
                  Tow'rds the unity of Nature;
    Sudden chivalries revealing whence the longing is renewed
    In the men that live for England, live and love and die for England:
                  By the light of their desire
                  They shall blindly blunder higher,
    To a wider, grander Kingdom and a deeper, nobler Good.

    There is a song of England that only heaven can hear;
                  So gloriously victorious,
    It soars above the choral stars that sing the Golden Year;
                  Till even the cloudy shadows
                  That wander o'er her meadows
    In silent purple harmonies declare His glory there,
    Along the hills of England, the billowy hills of England;
                  While heaven rolls and ranges
                  Through all the myriad changes
    That mirror God in music to the mortal eye and ear.

    _There is a song of England that none shall ever sing;
                  So sweet it is and fleet it is
    That none whose words are not as fleet as birds upon the wing,
                  And regal as her mountains,
                  And radiant as her fountains
    Of rainbow-coloured sea-spray that every wave can fling
    Against the cliffs of England, the sturdy cliffs of England,
                  Could more than seem to dream of it,
                  Or catch one flying gleam of it,
    Above the seas of England that never cease to sing._




THE OLD SCEPTIC


    I am weary of disbelieving: why should I wound my love
      To pleasure a sophist's pride in a graven image of truth?
    I will go back to my home, with the clouds and the stars above,
      And the heaven I used to know, and the God of my buried youth.

    I will go back to the home where of old in my boyish pride
      I pierced my father's heart with a murmur of unbelief.
    He only looked in my face as I spoke, but his mute eyes cried
      Night after night in my dreams; and he died in grief, in grief.

    Books? I have read the books, the books that we write ourselves,
      Extolling our love of an abstract truth and our pride of debate:
    I will go back to the love of the cotter who sings as he delves,
      To that childish infinite love and the God above fact and date.

    To that ignorant infinite God who colours the meaningless flowers,
      To that lawless infinite Poet who crowns the law with the crime;
    To the Weaver who covers the world with a garment of wonderful hours,
      And holds in His hand like threads the tales and the truths of time.

    Is the faith of the cotter so simple and narrow as this? Ah, well,
      It is hardly so narrow as yours who daub and plaster with dyes
    The shining mirrors of heaven, the shadowy mirrors of hell,
      And blot out the dark deep vision, if it seem to be framed with lies.

    No faith I hurl against you, no fact to freeze your sneers.
      Only the doubt you taught me to weld in the fires of youth
    Leaps to my hand like the flaming sword of nineteen hundred years,
      The sword of the high God's answer, _O Pilate, what is truth?_

    Your laughter has killed more hearts than ever were pierced with swords,
      Ever you daub new mirrors and turn the old to the wall;
    And more than blood is lost in the weary battle of words;
      For creeds are many; but God is One, and contains them all.

    Ah, why should we strive or cry? Surely the end is close!
      Hold by your little truths: deem your triumph complete!
    But nothing is true or false in the infinite heart of the rose;
      And the earth is a little dust that clings to our travelling feet.

    I will go back to my home and look at the wayside flowers,
      And hear from the wayside cabins the kind old hymns again,
    Where Christ holds out His arms in the quiet evening hours,
      And the light of the chapel porches broods on the peaceful lane.

    And there I shall hear men praying the deep old foolish prayers,
      And there I shall see, once more, the fond old faith confessed,
    And the strange old light on their faces who hear as a blind man hears,--
     _Come unto Me, ye weary, and I will give you rest._

    I will go back and believe in the deep old foolish tales,
      And pray the simple prayers that I learned at my mother's knee,
    Where the Sabbath tolls its peace thro' the breathless mountain-vales,
      And the sunset's evening hymn hallows the listening sea.




THE DEATH OF CHOPIN


    Sing to me! Ah, remember how
      Poor Heine here in Paris leant
    Watching me play at the fall of day
      And following where the music went,
    Till that old cloud upon his brow
      Was almost smoothed away.

    "Do roses in the moonlight flame
      Like this and this?" he said and smiled;
    Then bent his head as o'er his dead
      Brother might breathe some little child
    The accustomed old half-jesting name,
      With all its mockery fled,

    Like summer lightnings, far away,
      In heaven. O, what Bohemian nights
    We passed down there for that brief year
      When art revealed her last delights;
    And then, that night, that night in May
      When Hugo came to hear!

    "Do roses in the moonlight glow
      Like this and this?" I could not see
    His eyes, and yet--they were quite wet,
      Blinded, I think! What should I be
    If in that hour I did not know
      My own diviner debt?

    For God has made this world of ours
      Out of His own exceeding pain,
    As here in art man's bleeding heart
      Slow drop by drop completes the strain;
    And dreams of death make sweet the flowers
      Where lovers meet to part.

    Recall, recall my little room
      Where all the masters came that night,
    Came just to hear me, Meyerbeer,
      Lamartine, Balzac; and no light
    But my two candles in the gloom;
      Though she, she too was there,

    George Sand. This music once unlocked
      My heart, she took the gold she prized:
    Her novel gleams no richer: dreams
      Like mine are best unanalysed:
    And she forgets her poor bemocked
      Prince Karol, now, it seems.

    I was Prince Karol; yes, and Liszt
      Count Salvator Albani: she
    My Floriani--all so far
      Away!--My dreams are like the sea
    That round Majorca sighed and kissed
      Each softly mirrored star.

    O, what a golden round of hours
      Our island villa knew: we two
    Alone with sky and sea, the sigh
      Of waves, the warm unfathomed blue;
    With what a chain of nights like flowers
      We bound Love, she and I.

    What music, what harmonious
      Glad triumphs of the world's desire
    Where passion yearns to God and burns
      Earth's dross out with its own pure fire,
    Or tolls like some deep angelus
      Through Death's divine nocturnes.

    "Do roses in the moonlight glow
      Like this and this?" What did she think
    Of him whose hands at Love's command
      Made Life as honey o'er the brink
    Of Death drip slow, darkling and slow?
      Ah, did she understand?

    She studied every sob she heard,
      She watched each dying hope she found;
    And yet she understood not one
      Poor sorrow there that like a wound
    Gaped, bleeding, pleading--for one word--
      No? And the dream was done.

    For her--I am "wrapped in incense gloom,
      In drifting clouds and golden light;"
    Once I was shod with fire and trod
      Beethoven's path through storm and night:
    It is too late now to resume
      My monologue with God.

    Well, my lost love, you were so kind
      In those old days: ah, yes; you came
    When I was ill! In dreams you still
      Will come? (Do roses always flame
    By moonlight, thus?) I, too, grow blind
      With wondering if she will.

    Yet, Floriani, what am I
      To you, though love was life to me?
    My life consumed like some perfumed
      Pale altar-flame beside the sea:
    You stood and smiled and watched it die!
      You, you whom it illumed,
    Could you not feed it with your love?
      Am I not starving here and now?
    Sing, sing! I'd miss no smile or kiss--
      No roses in Majorca glow
    Like this and this--so death may prove
      Best--ah, how sweet life is!




SONG

(AFTER THE FRENCH OF ROSTAND)


    O, many a lover sighs
    Beneath the summer skies
    For black or hazel eyes
              All day.
    No light of hope can mar
    My whiter brighter star;
    I love a Princess far
              Away.

    Now you that haste to meet
    Your love's returning feet
    Must plead for every sweet
              Caress;
    But, day and night and day,
    Without a prayer to pray,
    I love my far away
              Princess.




BUTTERFLIES


    Sun-child, as you watched the rain
            Beat the pane,
    Saw the garden of your dreams
      Where the clove carnation grows
            And the rose
    Veiled with shimmering shades and gleams,
    Mirrored colours, mystic gleams,
              Fairy dreams,
    Drifting in your radiant eyes
      Half in earnest asked, that day,
              Half in play,
    Where were all the butterflies?

    Where were all the butterflies
              When the skies
    Clouded and their bowers of clover
      Bowed beneath the golden shower?
              Every flower
    Shook and the rose was brimming over.

    Ah, the dog-rose trembling over
              Thyme and clover,
    How it glitters in the sun,
      Now the hare-bells lift again
              Bright with rain
    After all the showers are done!

    See, when all the showers are done,
              How the sun
    Softly smiling o'er the scene
      Bids the white wings come and go
              To and fro
    Through the maze of gold and green.

    Magic webs of gold and green
              Rainbow sheen
    Mesh the maze of flower and fern,
      Cuckoo-grass and meadow-sweet,
              And the wheat
    Where the crimson poppies burn.

    Ay; and where the poppies burn,
              They return
    All across the dreamy downs,
      Little wings that flutter and beat
              O'er the sweet
    Bluffs the purple clover crowns.

    Where the fairy clover crowns
              Dreamy downs,
    And amidst the golden grass
      Buttercups and daisies blow
              To and fro
    When the shadowy billows pass;

    Time has watched them pause and pass
              Where Love was;
    Ah, what fairy butterflies,
      Little wild incarnate blisses,
              Coloured kisses,
    Floating under azure skies!

    Under those eternal skies
              See, they rise:
    Mottled wings of moony sheen,
      Wings in whitest star-shine dipped,
              Orange tipped,
    Eyed with black and veined with green.

    They were fairies plumed with green
              Rainbow-sheen
    Ere Time bade their host begone
      From that palace built of roses
              Which still dozes
    In the greenwood all alone.

    In the greenwood all alone
              And unknown:
    Now they roam these mortal dells
      Wondering where that happy glade is,
              Painted Ladies,
    Admirals, and Tortoise-shells,

    O, Fritillaries, Admirals,
              Tortoise-shells;
    You, like fragments of the skies
      Fringed with Autumn's richest hues,
              Dainty blues
    Patterned with mosaic dyes;
    Oh, and you whose peacock dyes
              Gleam with eyes;
    You, whose wings of burnished copper
      Burn upon the sunburnt brae
              Where all day
    Whirrs the hot and grey grasshopper;

    While the grey grasshopper whirrs
              In the furze,
    You that with your sulphur wings
      Melt into the gold perfume
              Of the broom
    Where the linnet sits and sings;

    You that, as a poet sings,
              On your wings
    Image forth the dreams of earth,
      Quickening them in form and hue
              To the new
    Glory of a brighter birth;

    You that bring to a brighter birth
              Dust and earth,
    Rapt to glory on your wings,
      All transfigured in the white
              Living light
    Shed from out the soul of things;

    Heralds of the soul of things,
              You whose wings
    Carry heaven through every glade;
      Thus transfigured from the petals
              Death unsettles,
    Little souls of leaf and blade;

    You that mimic bud and blade,
              Light and shade;
    Tinted souls of leaf and stone,
      Flower and sunny bank of sand,
              Fairyland
    Calls her children to their own;
    Calls them back into their own
              Great unknown;
    Where the harmonies they cull
      On their wings are made complete
              As they beat
    Through the Gate called Beautiful.




SONG OF THE WOODEN-LEGGED FIDDLER

(PORTSMOUTH 1805)


    I lived in a cottage adown in the West
            When I was a boy, a boy;
    But I knew no peace and I took no rest
    Though the roses nigh smothered my snug little nest;
            For the smell of the sea
            Was much rarer to me,
    And the life of a sailor was all my joy.

    CHORUS.--_The life of a sailor was all my joy!_

    My mother she wept, and she begged me to stay
      Anchored for life to her apron-string,
    And soon she would want me to help with the hay;
    So I bided her time, then I flitted away
      On a night of delight in the following spring,
            With a pair of stout shoon
            And a seafaring tune
    And a bundle and stick in the light of the moon,
            Down the long road
            To Portsmouth I strode,
    To fight like a sailor for country and king.

    CHORUS.--_To fight like a sailor for country and king._

    And now that my feet are turned homeward again
      My heart is still crying Ahoy! Ahoy!
    And my thoughts are still out on the Spanish main
    A-chasing the frigates of France and Spain,
      For at heart an old sailor is always a boy;
              And his nose will still itch
              For the powder and pitch
    Till the days when he can't tell t'other from which,
      Nor a grin o' the guns from a glint o' the sea,
      Nor a skipper like Nelson from lubbers like me.

    CHORUS.--_Nor a skipper like Nelson from lubbers like me._

    Ay! Now that I'm old I'm as bold as the best,
      And the life of a sailor is all my joy;
              Though I've swapped my leg
              For a wooden peg
    And my head is as bald as a new-laid egg,
              The smell of the sea
              Is like victuals to me,
    And I think in the grave I'll be crying Ahoy!
      For, though my old carcass is ready to rest,
      At heart an old sailor is always a boy.

    CHORUS.--_At heart an old sailor is always a boy._




THE FISHER-GIRL


    Where the old grey churchyard slopes to the sea,
      On the sunny side of a mossed headstone;
    Watching the wild white butterflies pass
    Through the fairy forests of grass,
    Two little children with brown legs bare
        Were merrily, merrily
    Weaving a wonderful daisy-chain,
    And chanting the rhyme that was graven there
        Over and over and over again;
    While the warm wind came and played with their hair
        And laughed and was gone
    Out, far out to the foam-flowered lea
    Like an ocean-wandering memory.

        _Eighteen hundred and forty-three,
        Dan Trevennick was lost at sea;
        And, buried here at her husband's side
        Lies the body of Joan, his bride,
        Who, a little while after she lost him, died._

    This was the rhyme that was graven there,
      And the children chanted it quietly;
    As the warm wind came and played with their hair,
    And rustled the golden grasses against the stone,
        And laughed and was gone
    To waken the wild white flowers of the sea,
    And sing a song of the days that were,
    A song of memory, gay and blind
    As the sun on the graves that it left behind;
    For this, ah this, was the song of the wind.


    I

    She sat on the tarred old jetty, with a sailor's careless ease,
    And the clear waves danced around her feet and kissed her tawny knees;
    Her head was bare, and her thick black hair was coiled behind a throat
    Chiselled as hard and bright and bold as the bow of a sailing boat.


    II

    Her eyes were blue, and her jersey was blue as the lapping,
        slapping seas,
    And the rose in her cheek was painted red by the brisk Atlantic breeze;
    And she sat and waited her father's craft, while Dan Trevennick's eyes
    Were sheepishly watching her sunlit smiles and her soft contented
        sighs.


    III

    For he thought he would give up his good black pipe and his evening
        glasses of beer,
    And blunder to chapel on Sundays again for a holy Christian year,
    To hold that foot in his hard rough hand and kiss the least of
        its toes:
    Then he swore at himself for a great damned fool; which he probably
        was, God knows.


    IV

    Often in summer twilights, too, he would sit on a coil of rope,
    As the stars came out in their twinkling crowds to play with wonder
        and hope,
    While he watched the side of her clear-cut face as she sat on the
        jetty and fished,
    And even to help her coil her line was more than he hoped or wished.


    V

    But once or twice o'er the dark green tide he saw with a solemn
        delight,
    Hooked and splashing after her line, a flash and a streak of white;
    As hand over hand she hauled it up, a great black conger eel,
    For Dan Trevennick to kill as it squirmed with its head beneath
        his heel.


    VI

    And at last, with a crash and a sunset cry from the low soft evening
        star,
    A shadowy schooner suddenly loomed o'er the dark green oily bar;
    With fairy-like spars and misty masts in the golden dusk of gloaming,
    Where the last white seamew's wide-spread wings were wistfully
        westward roaming;


    VII

    Then the song of the foreign seamen rose in the magical evening air,
    Faint and far away, as it seemed, but they knew it was, ah, so near;
    Far away as her heart from Dan's as he sheepishly drew to her side,
    And near as her heart when he kissed the lips of his newly promised
        bride.


    VIII

    And when they were riding away in the train on the night of their
        honeymoon,
    What a whisper tingled against her cheek as it blushed like a
        rose in June;
    For she said, "I am tired and ready for bed," and Dan said, "So
        am I;"
    And she murmured, "Are you tired, too, poor Dan?" and he answered
        her, "No, dear, why?"


    IX

    It was never a problem-play, at least, and the end of it all is this;
    They were drowned in the bliss of their ignorance and buried the rest
        in a kiss;
    And they loved one another their whole life long, as lovers will
        often do;
    For it never was only the fairy-tales that rang so royally true.


    X

    _The rose in her cheek was painted red by the brisk Atlantic breeze;
    Her eyes were blue, and her jersey was blue as the lapping, slapping
        seas;
    Her head was bare, and her thick black hair was coiled behind a throat
    Chiselled as hard and bright and bold as the bow of a sailing boat._


    XI

        _Eighteen hundred and forty-three,
        Dan Trevennick was lost at sea;
        And, buried here at her husband's side
        Lies the body of Joan, his bride,
        Who, a little while after she lost him, died._




A SONG OF TWO BURDENS


    The round brown sails were reefed and struggling home
      Over the glitter and gloom of the angry deep:
    Dark in the cottage she sang, "Soon, soon, he will come,
      Dreamikin, Drowsy-head, sleep, my little one, sleep."

    Over the glitter and gloom of the angry deep
      Was it only a dream or a shadow that vanished away?
    "Lullaby, little one, sleep, my little one, sleep."
      She sang in a dream as the shadows covered the day.

    Was it only a sail or a shadow that vanished away?
      The boats come home: there is one that will never return;
    But she sang in a dream as the shadows buried the day;
      And she set the supper and begged the fire to burn.

    The boats come home; but one will never return;
      And a strangled cry went up from the struggling sea.
    She sank on her knees and begged the fire to burn,
      "Burn, oh burn, for my love is coming to me!"

    A strangled cry went up from the struggling sea,
      A cry where the ghastly surf to the moon-dawn rolled;
    "Burn, oh burn; for my love is coming to me,
      His hands will be scarred with the ropes and starved with the cold."

    A strangled cry where the foam in the moonlight rolled,
      A bitter cry from the heart of the ghastly sea;
    "His hands will be frozen, the night is dark and cold,
      Burn, oh burn, for my love is coming to me."

    One cry to God from the soul of the shuddering sea,
      One moment of stifling lips and struggling hands;
    "Burn, oh burn; for my love is coming to me;
      And oh, I think the little one understands."

    One moment of stifling lips and struggling hands,
      Then only the glitter and gloom of the angry deep;
    "And oh, I think the little one understands;
      Dreamikin, Drowsy-head, sleep, my little one, sleep."




EARTH-BOUND


    Ghosts? Love would fain believe,
      Earth being so fair, the dead might wish to return!
      Is it so strange if, even in heaven, they yearn
    For the May-time and the dreams it used to give?

    Through dark abysms of Space,
      From strange new spheres where Death has called them now
      May they not, with a crown on every brow,
    Still cry to the loved earth's lost familiar face?

    We two, love, we should come
      Seeking a little refuge from the light
      Of the blinding terrible star-sown Infinite,
    Seeking some sheltering roof, some four-walled home,

    From that too high, too wide
      Communion with the universe and God,
      How glad to creep back to some lane we trod
    Hemmed in with a hawthorn hedge on either side.

    Fresh from death's boundless birth,
      How fond the circled vision of the sea
      Would seem to souls tired of Infinity,
    How kind the soft blue boundaries of earth,

    How rich the nodding spray
      Of pale green leaves that made the sapphire deep
      A background to the dreams of that brief sleep
    We called our life when heaven was far away.

    How strange would be the sight
      Of the little towns and twisted streets again,
      Where all the hurrying works and ways of men
    Would seem a children's game for our delight.

    What boundless heaven could give
      This joy in the strait austere restraints of earth,
      Whereof the dead have felt the immortal dearth
    Who look upon God's face and cannot live?

    Our ghosts would clutch at flowers
      As drowning men at straws, for fear the sea
      Should sweep them back to God's Eternity,
    Still clinging to the day that once was ours.

    No more with fevered brain
      Plunging across the gulfs of Space and Time
      Would we revisit this our earthly clime
    We two, if we could ever come again;

    Not as we came of old,
      But reverencing the flesh we now despise
      And gazing out with consecrated eyes,
    Each of us glad of the other's hand to hold.

    So we should wander nigh
      Our mortal home, and see its little roof
      Keeping the deep eternal night aloof
    And yielding us a refuge from the sky.

    We should steal in, once more,
      Under the cloudy lilac at the gate,
      Up the walled garden, then with hearts elate
    Forget the stars and close our cottage door.

    Oh then, as children use
      To make themselves a little hiding-place,
      We would rejoice in narrowness of space,
    And God should give us nothing more to lose.

    How good it all would seem
      To souls that from the æonian ebb and flow
      Came down to hear once more the to and fro
    Swing o' the clock dictate its hourly theme.

    How dear the strange recall
      From vast antiphonies of joy and pain
      Beyond the grave, to these old books again,
    That cosy lamp, those pictures on the wall.

    Home! Home! The old desire!
      We would shut out the innumerable skies,
      Draw close the curtains, then with patient eyes
      Bend o'er the hearth; laugh at our memories,
    Or watch them crumbling in the crimson fire.




ART, THE HERALD

"The voice of one crying in the wilderness"


    I

    Beyond; beyond; and yet again beyond!
    What went ye out to seek, oh foolish-fond?
      Is not the heart of all things here and now?
    Is not the circle infinite, and the centre
    Everywhere, if ye would but hear and enter?
      Come; the porch bends and the great pillars bow.


    II

    Come; come and see the secret of the sun;
    The sorrow that holds the warring worlds in one;
      The pain that holds Eternity in an hour;
    One God in every seed self-sacrificed,
    One star-eyed, star-crowned universal Christ,
      Re-crucified in every wayside flower.




THE OPTIMIST


    Teach me to live and to forgive
      The death that all must die
    Who pass in slumber through this heaven
      Of earth and sea and sky;
    Who live by grace of Time and Space
      At which their peace is priced;
    And cast their lots upon the robe
      That wraps the cosmic Christ;

    Who cannot see the world-wide Tree
      Where Love lies bleeding still;
    This universal cross of God
      Our star-crowned Igdrasil.

    Teach me to live; I do not ask
      For length of earthly days,
    Or that my heaven-appointed task
      Should fall in pleasant ways;

    If in this hour of warmth and light
      The last great knell were knolled;
    If Death should close mine eyes to-night
      And all the tale be told;

    While I have lips to speak or sing
      And power to draw this breath,
    Shall I not praise my Lord and King
      Above all else, for death?

    When on a golden eve he drove
      His keenest sorrow deep
    Deep in my heart, and called it love;
      I did not wince or weep.

    A wild Hosanna shook the world
      And wakened all the sky,
    As through a white and burning light
      Her passionate face went by.

    When on a golden dawn he called
      My best beloved away,
    I did not shrink or stand appalled
      Before the hopeless day.

    The joy of that triumphant dearth
      And anguish cannot die;
    The joy that casts aside this earth
      For immortality.

    I would not change one word of doom
      Upon the dreadful scroll,
    That gave her body to the tomb
      And freed her fettered soul.

    For now each idle breeze can bring
      The kiss I never seek;
    The nightingale has heard her sing,
      The rose caressed her cheek.

    And every pang of every grief
      That ruled my soul an hour,
    Has given new splendours to the leaf,
      New glories to the flower;

    And melting earth into the heaven
      Whose inmost heart is pain,
    Has drawn the veils apart and given
      Her soul to mine again.




A POST-IMPRESSION


    I

    He sat with his foolish mouth agape at the golden glare of the sea,
      And his wizened and wintry flaxen locks fluttered around his ears,
    And his foolish infinite eyes were full of the sky's own glitter
        and glee,
      As he dandled an old Dutch Doll on his knee and sang the song of
        the spheres.


    II

    _Blue and red and yellow and green they are melting away in the white;
    Hey! but the wise old world was wrong and my idiot heart was right;
    Yes; and the merry-go-round of the stars rolls to my cracked old tune,
    Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    III

    Then he cradled his doll on his crooning heart and cried as a sea-bird
        cries;
      And the hot sun reeled like a drunken god through the violent violet
        vault:
    And the hillside cottage that danced to the deep debauch of the
        perfumed skies
      Grew palsied and white in the purple heath as a pillar of Dead
          Sea salt.


    IV

    There were three gaunt sun-flowers nigh his chair: they were yellow as
        death and tall;
    And they threw their sharp blue shadowy stars on the blind white
        wizard wall;
    And they nodded their heads to the weird old hymn that daunted the light
        of the noon,
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    V

    The little dog laughed and leered with the white of his eye as he
        sidled away
      To stare at the dwarfish hunchback waves that crawled to the foot of
        the hill,
    For his master's infinite mind was wide to the wealth of the night
        and the day;
      The walls were down: it was one with the Deep that only a God
          can fill.


    VI

    Then a tiny maiden of ten sweet summers arrived with a song and
        a smile,
    And she swung on the elfin garden-gate and sung to the sea for
        a while,
    And a phantom face went weeping by and a ghost began to croon
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    VII

    And she followed a butterfly up to his chair; and the moon-calf caught
        at her hand
      And stared at her wide blue startled eyes and muttered, "My dear,
        I have been,
    In fact, I am there at this moment, I think, in a wonderful fairy-land:"
      And he bent and he whispered it low in her ear--"_I know why the
        grass is green._


    VIII

    "I know why the daisy is white, my dear, I know why the seas are blue;
    I know that the world is a dream, my dear, and I know that the dream
        is true;
    I know why the rose and the toad-stool grow, as a curse and a
        crimson boon,
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._


    IX

    "If I gaze at a rose, do you know, it grows till it overshadows
        the earth,
      Like a wonderful Tree of Knowledge, my dear, the Tree of our evil
        and good;
    But I dare not tell you the terrible vision that gave the toad-stool
        birth,
      The dream of a heart that breaks, my dear, and a Tree that is
        bitter with blood.


    X

    "Oh, Love may wander wide as the wind that blows from sea to sea,
    But a wooden dream, for me, my dear, and a painted memory;
    For the God that has bidden the toad-stool grow has writ in his
        cosmic rune,
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._"


    XI

    Then he stared at the child and he laughed aloud, and she suddenly
        screamed and fled,
      As he dreamed of enticing her out thro' the ferns to a quarry
        that gapped the hill,
    To hurtle her down and grin as her gold hair scattered around
        her head
      Far, far below, like a sunflower disk, so crimson-spattered
        and still.


    XII

    "Ah, hush!" he cried; and his dark old eyes were wet with a sacred love
    As he kissed the wooden face of his doll and winked at the skies above,
    "I know, I know why the toad-stools grow, and the rest of the world
        will, soon;
    _Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._"


    XIII

    "_Blue and red and yellow and green they are all mixed up in the white;
    Hey! but the wise old world was wrong and my idiot heart was right;
    Yes; and the merry-go-round of the stars rolls to my cracked old tune,
    Hey! diddle, diddle, the cat and the fiddle, the cow jumped over
        the moon._"




THE BARREL-ORGAN


    There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And the music's not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
      And fulfilled it with the sunset glow;
    And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
      That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light;
    And they've given it a glory and a part to play again
      In the Symphony that rules the day and night.

    And now it's marching onward through the realms of old romance,
      And trolling out a fond familiar tune,
    And now it's roaring cannon down to fight the King of France,
      And now it's prattling softly to the moon,
    And all around the organ there's a sea without a shore
      Of human joys and wonders and regrets;
    To remember and to recompense the music evermore
      For what the cold machinery forgets....

    Yes; as the music changes,
      Like a prismatic glass,
    It takes the light and ranges
      Through all the moods that pass;
    Dissects the common carnival
      Of passions and regrets,
    And gives the world a glimpse of all
      The colours it forgets.

    And there _La Traviata_ sighs
      Another sadder song;
    And there _Il Trovatore_ cries
      A tale of deeper wrong;
    And bolder knights to battle go
      With sword and shield and lance,
    Than ever here on earth below
      Have whirled into--_a dance_!--

    Go down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
      Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)
    And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland;
      Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)

    The cherry-trees are seas of bloom and soft perfume and sweet perfume,
      The cherry-trees are seas of bloom (and oh, so near to London!)
    And there they say, when dawn is high and all the world's a blaze of sky
      The cuckoo, though he's very shy, will sing a song for London.

    The Dorian nightingale is rare and yet they say you'll hear him there
      At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
    The linnet and the throstle, too, and after dark the long halloo
      And golden-eyed _tu-whit, tu-whoo_ of owls that ogle London.

    For Noah hardly knew a bird of any kind that isn't heard
      At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
    And when the rose begins to pout and all the chestnut spires are out
      You'll hear the rest without a doubt, all chorussing for London:--

    _Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)
    And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)_

    And then the troubadour begins to thrill the golden street,
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And in all the gaudy busses there are scores of weary feet
    Marking time, sweet time, with a dull mechanic beat,
    And a thousand hearts are plunging to a love they'll never meet,
    Through the meadows of the sunset, through the poppies and the wheat,
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    Verdi, Verdi, when you wrote _Il Trovatore_ did you dream
      Of the City when the sun sinks low,
    Of the organ and the monkey and the many-coloured stream
    On the Piccadilly pavement, of the myriad eyes that seem
    To be litten for a moment with a wild Italian gleam
    As _A che la morte_ parodies the world's eternal theme
      And pulses with the sunset-glow.

    There's a thief, perhaps, that listens with a face of frozen stone
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    There's a portly man of business with a balance of his own,
    There's a clerk and there's a butcher of a soft reposeful tone.
    And they're all of them returning to the heavens they have known:
    They are crammed and jammed in busses and--they're each of them alone
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a very modish woman and her smile is very bland
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And her hansom jingles onward, but her little jewelled hand
    Is clenched a little tighter and she cannot understand
    What she wants or why she wanders to that undiscovered land,
    For the parties there are not at all the sort of thing she planned,
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a rowing man that listens and his heart is crying out
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    For the barge, the eight, the Isis, and the coach's whoop and shout,
    For the minute-gun, the counting and the long dishevelled rout,
    For the howl along the tow-path and a fate that's still in doubt,
    For a roughened oar to handle and a race to think about
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a labourer that listens to the voices of the dead
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    And his hand begins to tremble and his face to smoulder red
    As he sees a loafer watching him and--there he turns his head
    And stares into the sunset where his April love is fled,
    For he hears her softly singing and his lonely soul is led
      Through the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's an old and haggard demi-rep, it's ringing in her ears,
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    With the wild and empty sorrow of the love that blights and sears,
    Oh, and if she hurries onward, then be sure, be sure she hears,
    Hears and bears the bitter burden of the unforgotten years,
    And her laugh's a little harsher and her eyes are brimmed with tears
      For the land where the dead dreams go.

    There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
      In the City as the sun sinks low;
    Though the music's only Verdi there's a world to make it sweet
    Just as yonder yellow sunset where the earth and heaven meet
    Mellows all the sooty City! Hark, a hundred thousand feet
    Are marching on to glory through the poppies and the wheat
      In the land where the dead dreams go.

    So it's Jeremiah, Jeremiah,
      What have you to say
    When you meet the garland girls
      Tripping on their way?

    All around my gala hat
      I wear a wreath of roses
    (A long and lonely year it is
      I've waited for the May!)
    If any one should ask you,
      The reason why I wear it is--
    My own love, my true love
      Is coming home to-day.

    And it's buy a bunch of violets for the lady
      (_It's lilac-time in London; it's lilac-time in London!_)
    Buy a bunch of violets for the lady
      While the sky burns blue above:

    On the other side the street you'll find it shady
      (_It's lilac-time in London; it's lilac-time in London!_)
    But buy a bunch of violets for the lady,
      And tell her she's your own true love.

    There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
      In the City as the sun sinks glittering and slow;
    And the music's not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
    And enriched it with the harmonies that make a song complete
    In the deeper heavens of music where the night and morning meet,
      As it dies into the sunset-glow;
    And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain
      That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light,
    And they've given it a glory and a part to play again
      In the Symphony that rules the day and night.

    And there, as the music changes,
      The song runs round again.
    Once more it turns and ranges
      Through all its joy and pain,
    Dissects the common carnival
      Of passions and regrets;
    And the wheeling world remembers all
      The wheeling song forgets.

    Once more _La Traviata_ sighs
      Another sadder song:
    Once more _Il Trovatore_ cries
      A tale of deeper wrong;
    Once more the knights to battle go
      With sword and shield and lance
    Till once, once more, the shattered foe
      Has whirled into--_a dance_!

    _Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)
    And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland;
      Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!_)




THE LITANY OF WAR


    Sandalphon, whose white wings to heaven upbear
            The weight of human prayer,
    Stood silent in the still eternal Light
            Of God, one dreadful night.
    His wings were clogged with blood and foul with mire,
            His body seared with fire.
    "Hast thou no word for Me?" the Master said.
            The angel sank his head:

    "Word from the nations of the East and West,"
            He moaned, "that blood is best.
    The patriot prayers of either half of earth,
            Hear Thou, and judge their worth.
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
            First, the first nation's prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord!_'

    "Pure as the first, as passionate in trust
            That their own cause is just;
    Puppets as fond in those dark hands of greed;
            As fervent in their creed;
    As blindly moved, as utterly betrayed,
            As urgent for Thine aid;
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear
            The second nation's prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord._'

    "Over their slaughtered children, one great cry
            From either enemy!
    From either host, thigh-deep in filth and shame,
            One prayer, one and the same;
    Out of the obscene seas of slaughter, hear,
            From East and West, one prayer:
    '_O God, deliver Thy people. Let Thy sword
            Destroy our enemies, Lord._'"

    Then, on the Cross of His creative pain,
            God bowed His head again.
    Then, East and West, over all seas and lands,
            Out-stretched His piercèd hands.
    "And yet," Sandalphon whispered, "men deny
            The Eternal Calvary."




THE ORIGIN OF LIFE

[_Written in answer to certain scientific pronouncements_]


    I

    _In the beginning?_--Slowly grope we back
            Along the narrowing track,
    Back to the deserts of the world's pale prime,
            The mire, the clay, the slime;
    And then ... what then? Surely to something less;
            Back, back, to Nothingness!


    II

    You dare not halt upon that dwindling way!
            There is no gulf to stay
    Your footsteps to the last. Go back you must!
            Far, far below the dust,
    Descend, descend! Grade by dissolving grade,
            We follow, unafraid!
    Dissolve, dissolve this moving world of men
            Into thin air--and then?


    III

    O pioneers, O warriors of the Light,
            In that abysmal night,
    Will you have courage, then, to rise and tell
            Earth of this miracle?
    Will you have courage, then, to bow the head,
            And say, when all is said--

    "Out of this Nothingness arose our thought!
            This blank abysmal Nought
    Woke, and brought forth that lighted City street,
            Those towers, that armoured fleet?" ...


    IV

    When you have seen those vacant primal skies
            Beyond the centuries.
    Watched the pale mists across their darkness flow,
            As in a lantern-show,
    Weaving, by merest "chance," out of thin air,
            Pageants of praise and prayer;
    Watched the great hills like clouds arise and set,
            And one--named Olivet;
    When you have seen, as a shadow passing away,
            One child clasp hands and pray;
    When you have seen emerge from that dark mire
            One martyr, ringed with fire;
    Or, from that Nothingness, by special grace,
            One woman's love-lit face, ...


    V

    Will you have courage, then, to front that law
            (From which your sophists draw
    Their only right to flout one human creed)
            That nothing can proceed--
    Not even thought, not even love--from less
            Than its own nothingness?
    The law is yours! But dare you waive your pride,
            And kneel where you denied?
    The law is yours! Dare you re-kindle, then,
            One faith for faithless men,
    And say you found, on that dark road you trod,
            _In the beginning--GOD_?




THE LAST BATTLE


    Kings of the earth, Kings of the earth, the trumpet rings for warning,
      And like the golden swords that ray from out the setting sun
    The shout goes out of the trumpet mouth across the hills of morning,
      Wake; for the last great battle dawns and all the wars are done.

    Now all the plains of Europe smoke with marching hooves of thunder,
      And through each ragged mountain-gorge the guns begin to gleam;
    And round a hundred cities where the women watch and wonder,
      The tramp of passing armies aches and faints into a dream.

    The King of Ind is drawing nigh: a hundred leagues are clouded
      Along his loud earth-shaking march from east to western sea:
    The King o' the Setting Sun is here and all the seas are shrouded
      With sails that carry half the world to front Eternity.

    Soon shall the darkness roll around the grappling of the nations,
      A darkness lit with deadly gleams of blood and steel and fire;
    Soon shall the last great pæan of earth's war-worn generations
      Roar through the thunder-clouded air round War's red funeral pyre.

    But here defeat and victory are both allied with heaven,
      The enfolding sky makes every foe the centre of her dome,
    Each fights for God and his own right, and unto each is given
      The right to find the heart of heaven where'er he finds his home.

    O, who shall win, and who shall lose, and who shall take the glory
      Here at the meeting of the roads, where every cause is right?
    O, who shall live, and who shall die, and who shall tell the story?
      Each strikes for faith and fatherland in that immortal fight.

    High on the grey old hills of Time the last immortal rally,
      Under the storm of the last great tattered flag, shall laugh to see
    The blood of Armageddon roll from every smoking valley,
      Shall laugh aloud, then rush on death for God and chivalry.

    Kings of the earth, Kings of the earth, O, which of you then
        shall inherit
      The Kingdom, the Power and the Glory? for the world's old light
        grows dim
    And the cry of you all goes up all night to the dark enfolding Spirit,
      Each of you fights for God and home; but God, ah, what of Him?




THE PARADOX

"I Am that I Am"


    I

    All that is broken shall be mended;
        All that is lost shall be found;
        I will bind up every wound
    When that which is begun shall be ended.
    Not peace I brought among you but a sword
        To divide the night from the day,
    When I sent My worlds forth in their battle-array
        To die and to live,
        To give and to receive,
          Saith the Lord.


    II

    Of old time they said none is good save our God;
    But ye that have seen how the ages have shrunk from my rod,
    And how red is the wine-press wherein at my bidding they trod,
    Have answered and said that with Eden I fashioned the snake,
    That I mould you of clay for a moment, then mar you and break,
    And there is none evil but I, the supreme Evil, God.
        Lo, I say unto both, I am neither;
        But greater than either;
    For meeting and mingling in Me they become neither evil nor good;
    Their cycle is rounded, they know neither hunger nor food,
    They need neither sickle nor seed-time, nor root nor fruit,
        They are ultimate, infinite, absolute.
    Therefore I say unto all that have sinned,
        East and West and South and North
        The wings of my measureless love go forth
    To cover you all: they are free as the wings of the wind.


    III

    Consider the troubled waters of the sea
        Which never rest;
    As the wandering waves are ye;
        Yet assuaged and appeased and forgiven,
        As the seas are gathered together under the infinite glory of
            heaven,
        I gather you all to my breast.
    But the sins and the creeds and the sorrows that trouble the sea
        Relapse and subside,
    Chiming like chords in a world-wide symphony
        As they cease to chide;
    For they break and they are broken of sound and hue,
    And they meet and they murmur and they mingle anew,
    Interweaving, intervolving, like waves: they have no stay:
    They are all made as one with the deep, when they sink and are vanished
        away;
    Yea, all is toned at a turn of the tide
    To a calm and golden harmony;
    But I--shall I wonder or greatly care,
        For their depth or their height?
    Shall it be more than a song in my sight
    How many wandering waves there were,
    Or how many colours and changes of light?
        It is your eyes that see
    And take heed of these things: they were fashioned for you, not for Me.


    IV

    With the stars and the clouds I have clothed Myself here for your eyes
    To behold That which Is. I have set forth the strength of the skies
    As one draweth a picture before you to make your hearts wise;
    That the infinite souls I have fashioned may know as I know,
                    Visibly revealed
                    In the flowers of the field,
    Yea, declared by the stars in their courses, the tides in their flow,
    And the clash of the world's wide battle as it sways to and fro,
                    Flashing forth as a flame
                    The unnameable Name,
                    The ineffable Word,
                        _I am the Lord._


    V

    I am the End to which the whole world strives:
      Therefore are ye girdled with a wild desire and shod
    With sorrow; for among you all no soul
    Shall ever cease or sleep or reach its goal
    Of union and communion with the Whole,
      Or rest content with less than being God.
    Still, as unending asymptotes, your lives
      In all their myriad wandering ways
    Approach Me with the progress of the golden days;
      Approach Me; for my love contrives
    That ye should have the glory of this
        For ever; yea, that life should blend
        With life and only vanish away
        From day to wider wealthier day,
    Like still increasing spheres of light that melt and merge in
          wider spheres
    Even as the infinite years of the past melt in the infinite
          future years.
        Each new delight of sense,
        Each hope, each love, each fear,
        Widens, relumes and recreates each sphere,
    From a new ring and nimbus of pre-eminence.
    I am the Sphere without circumference:
    I only and for ever comprehend
    All others that within me meet and blend.
        Death is but the blinding kiss
        Of two finite infinities;
        Two finite infinite orbs
      The splendour of the greater of which absorbs
    The less, though both like Love have no beginning and no end.


    VI

    Therefore is Love's own breath
    Like Knowledge, a continual death;
    And all his laughter and kisses and tears,
      And woven wiles of peace and strife,
    That ever widen thus your temporal spheres,
    Are making of the memory of your former years
      A very death in life.


    VII

                  I am that I am;
                  Ye are evil and good;
    With colour and glory and story and song ye are fed as with food:
                  The cold and the heat,
                  The bitter and the sweet,
    The calm and the tempest fulfil my Word;
    Yet will ye complain of my two-edged sword
    That has fashioned the finite and mortal and given you the sweetness
        of strife,
                  The blackness and whiteness,
                  The darkness and brightness,
    Which sever your souls from the formless and void and hold you
        fast-fettered to life?


    VIII

        Behold now, is Life not good?
        Yea, is it not also much more than the food,
    More than the raiment, more than the breath?
        Yet Strife is its name!
    Say, which will ye cast out first from the furnace, the fuel or
        the flame?
    Would ye all be as I am; and know neither evil nor good; neither
        life; neither death;
    Or mix with the void and the formless till all were as one and
        the same?


    IX

    I am that I am; the Container of all things: kneel, lift up your hands
    To the high Consummation of good and of evil which none understands;
    The divine Paradox, the ineffable Word, in whose light the poor souls
        that ye trod
    Underfoot as too vile for their fellows are at terrible union with God!
        Am I not over both evil and good,
        The righteous man and the shedder of blood?
            Shall I save or slay?
        I am neither the night nor the day,
            Saith the Lord.
    Judge not, oh ye that are round my footstool, judge not, ere the hour
        be born
        That shall laugh you also to scorn.

    X

    Ah, yet I say unto all that have sinned,
      East and West and South and North
      The wings of my measureless love go forth
    To cover you all: they are free as the wings of the wind.


    XI

    But one thing is needful; and ye shall be true
      To yourselves and the goal and the God that ye seek;
    Yea, the day and the night shall requite it to you
      If ye love one another, if your love be not weak.


    XII

    Since I sent out my worlds in their battle-array
                    To die and to live,
                    To give and to receive,
    Not peace, not peace, I have brought among you but a sword,
      To divide the night from the day,
                    Saith the Lord;
    Yet all that is broken shall be mended,
                    And all that is lost shall be found,
                    I will bind up every wound,
    When that which is begun shall be ended.




THE PROGRESS OF LOVE

(A LYRICAL SYMPHONY)


    I

    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.
    The woodbine whispers, low and sweet and low,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    The firwoods murmur and the sea-waves know
      The message that the setting sun shall send.
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.


    II

    And God sighed in the sunset; and the sea
      Chanted the soft recessional of Time
    Against the golden shores of mystery;

    And ever as that long low change and chime
      With one slow sob of molten music yearned
    Westward, it seemed as if the Love sublime

    Almost uttered itself, where the waves burned
      In little flower-soft flames of rose and green
    That woke to seaward, while the tides returned

    Rising and falling, ruffled and serene,
      With all the mirrored tints of heaven above
    Shimmering through their mystic myriad sheen.

    As a dove's burnished breast throbbing with love
      Swells and subsides to call her soft-eyed mate
    Home through the rosy gloom of glen or grove,

    So when the greenwood noon was growing late
      The sea called softly through the waste of years,
    Called to the star that still can consecrate

    The holy golden haze of human tears
      Which tinges every sunset with our grief
    Until the perfect Paraclete appears.

    Ah, the long sigh that yields the world relief
      Rose and relapsed across Eternity,
    Making a joy of sorrows that are brief,

    As, o'er the bright enchantment of the sea,
      Facing the towers of that old City of Pain
    Which stands upon the shores of mystery

    And frowns across the immeasurable main,
      Venus among her cloudy sunset flowers
    Woke; and earth melted into heaven again.

    For even the City's immemorial towers
      Were tinted into secret tone and time,
    Like old forgotten tombs that age embowers

    With muffling roses and with mossy rime
      Until they seem no monument of ours,
    But one more note in earth's accordant chime.

    O Love, Love, Love, all dreams, desires and powers,
      Were but as chords of that ineffable psalm;
    And all the long blue lapse of summer hours,

    And all the breathing sunset's golden balm
      By that æonian sorrow were resolved
    As dew into the music's infinite calm,

    Through which the suns and moons and stars revolved
      According to the song's divine decree,
    Till Time was but a tide of intervolved

    And interweaving worlds of melody;
      _In other worlds I loved you, long ago_,--
    The angelic citoles fainted o'er the sea;

    And seraph citerns answered, sweet and low,
      From where the sunset and the moonrise blend,--
    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago_;

    _Love that hath no beginning hath no end_;
      O Love, Love, Love, the bitter City of Pain
    Bidding the golden echoes westward wend,

    Chimed in accordant undertone again:
      Though every grey old tower rose like a tomb
    To mock the glory of the shoreless main

    They could but strike such discords as illume
      The music with strange gleams of utter light
    And hallow all the valley's rosy gloom.

    And there, though greyly sinking out of sight
      Before the wonders of the sky and sea,
    Back through the valley, back into the night,

    While mystery melted into mystery,
      The City still rebuffed the far sweet West
    That dimmed her sorrows with infinity;

    Yet sometimes yearning o'er the sea's bright breast
      To that remote Avilion would she gaze
    Where all lost loves and weary warriors rest.

    Then she remembered, through that golden haze,
      (Oh faint as flowers the rose-white waves resound)
    Her Arthur whom she loved in the dead days,

    And how he sailed to heal him of his wound,
      And how he lives and reigns eternally
    Where now that unknown love is throned and crowned

    Who laid his bleeding head against her knee
      And loosed the bitter breast-plate and unbound
    His casque and brought him strangely o'er the sea,

    And how she reigns beside him on that shore
      For ever (Yrma, queen, bend down to me)
    And they twain have no sorrow any more.


    III

    They have forgotten all that vanished away
    When life's dark night died into death's bright day
    They have forgotten all except the gleam
    Of light when once he kissed her in a dream
    Once on the lips and once upon the brow
    In the white orb of God's transcendent Now;
    And even then he knew that, long before,
    Their eyes had met upon some distant shore;
    Yea; that most lonely and immortal face
    Which dwells beyond the dreams of time and space
    Bowed down to him from out the happy place
    And whispered to him, low and sweet and low
    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago_;
    And then he knew his love could never die
    Because his queen was throned beyond the sky
    And called him to his own immortal sphere
    Forgetting Launcelot and Guinevere.

    So Yrma reigns with Arthur, and they know
    They loved on earth a million years ago;
      And watched the sea-waves wistfully westward wend;
    And heard a voice whispering in their flow,
    And calling through the silent sunset-glow,
    _Love that hath no beginning hath no end._


    IV

    It was about the dawn of day
      I heard Etain and Anwyl say
    The waving ferns are a fairy forest,
      It is time, it is time to wander away;

    For the dew is bright on the heather bells,
    And the breeze in the clover sways and swells,
      As the waves on the blue sea wake and wander,
    Over and under the braes and dells.

    She was eight years old that day,
    Full of laughter and play;
      Eight years old and Anwyl nine,--
    Two young lovers were they.

    Two young lovers were they,
      Born in the City of Pain;
    There was never a song in the world so gay
      As the song of the child, Etain;

    There was never a laugh so sweet
      With the ripple of fairy bells,
    And never a fairy foot so fleet
      Dancing down the woodland dells!

    She was eight years old that day,
    Two young lovers were they.

    There was never a sea of mystical gleams
      Glooming under enchanted skies
    Deep as the dark miraculous dreams
      In Anwyl's haunted eyes.

    There was never a glory of light
      Around the carolling lark
    As Etain's eyes were brave and bright
      To daunt the coming dark.

    Two young lovers were they
      Born in the City of Pain;
    There was never a song in the world so gay
      As the song of the child, Etain;

    Blithe as the wind in the trees,
      Blithe as the bird on the bough,
    Blithe as the bees in the sweet Heart's-ease
      Where Love lies bleeding now.


    V

    And God sighed in the sunset; and the sea
      Forgot her sorrow, and all the breathless West
    Grew quiet as the blue tranquillity

    That clad the broken mountain's brilliant breast,
      Over the City, with deep heather-bloom
    Heaving from crag to crag in sweet unrest,

    A sea of dim rich colour and warm perfume
      Whose billows rocked the drowsy honey-bee
    Among the golden isles of gorse and broom

    Like some enchanted ancient argosy
      Drunkenly blundering over seas of dream
    Past unimagined isles of mystery,
    Over whose yellow sands the soft waves cream,
      And sunbeams float and toss across the bare
    Rose-white arms and perilous breasts that gleam

    Where sirens wind their glossy golden hair;
      Oh, miles on miles, the honeyed heather-bloom
    Heaving its purple through the high bright air

    Rolled a silent glory of gleam and gloom
      From mossy crag to crag and crest to crest
    Untroubled by the valley's depth of doom.

    The hawk dropped down into the pine-forest
      And, far below, the lavrock ruffled her wings
    Blossomwise over her winsome secret nest.

    Then suddenly, softly, as when a fairy sings
      Out of the heart of a rose in the heart of the fern,
    Or in the floating starlight faintly rings

    The frail blue hare-bells--turn again, and turn,
      Under and over, the silvery crescents cry
    To where the crimson fox-glove belfries burn

    And with a deeper softer peal reply,
      There came a ripple of music through the roses
    That rustled on the dimmest rim of sky

    Where many a frame of fretted leaves encloses
      For lovers wandering in the fern-wet wood
    An arch of summer sea that softly dozes

    As if all mysteries were understood:
      Yrma, my queen, what love could understand
    That faint sweet music, _God saith all is good_,

    As those two children, hand in sunburnt hand,
      Over the blithe blue hills and far away
    Wandered into their own green fairyland?


    VI

    For the song is lost that shook the dew
      Where the wild musk-roses glisten,
    When the sunset dreamed that a dream was true
      And the birds were hushed to listen.

    The song is lost that shook the night
      With wings of richer fire,
    Where the years had touched their eyes with light
      And their souls with a new desire;

    And the new delight of the strange old story
      Burned in the flower-soft skies,
    And nine more years with a darker glory
      Had deepened the light of her eyes;

    But lost, oh more than lost the song
      That shook the rose to tears,
    As hand in hand they danced along
      Through childhood's everlasting years.

    "Oh, Love has wings," the linnet sings;
      But the dead return no more, no more;
    And the sea is breaking its old grey heart
      Against the golden shore.

    She was eight years old that day,
    Two young lovers were they.

    If every song as they danced along
      Paused on the springing spray;
    Is there never a bird in the wide greenwood
      Will hush its heart to-day?

    There's never a leaf with dew impearled
      To make their pathway sweet,
    And never a blossom in all the world
      That knows the kiss of their feet.

    No light to-night declares the word
      That thrilled the blossomed bough,
    And stilled the happy singing bird
      That none can silence now.

    The weary nightingale may sob
      With her bleeding breast against a thorn,
    And the wild white rose with every throb
      Grow red as the laugh of morn;

    With wings outspread she sinks her head
      But Love returns no more, no more;
    And the sea is breaking its old grey heart
      Against the golden shore.

    Born in the City of Pain;
      Ah, who knows, who knows
    When Death shall turn to delight again
      Or a wound to a red, red rose?

    Eight years old that day,
    Full of laughter and play;
      Eight years old and Anwyl nine,--
    Two young lovers were they.


    VII

    And down the scented heather-drowsy hills
      The barefoot children wandered, hand in hand,
    And paddled through the laughing silver rills
      In quest of fairyland;
    And in each little sunburnt hand a spray,
      A purple fox-glove bell-branch lightly swung,
    And Anwyl told Etain how, far away,
      One day he wandered through the dreamland dells
    And watched the moonlit fairies as they sung
      And tolled the fox-glove bells;
    And oh, how sweetly, sweetly to and fro
    The fragrance of the music reeled and rung
      Under the loaded boughs of starry May.

    And God sighed in the sunset, and the sea
    Grew quieter than the hills: the mystery
    Of ocean, earth and sky was like a word
      Uttered, but all unheard,
    Uttered by every wave and cloud and leaf
    With all the immortal glory of mortal grief;
    And every wave that broke its heart of gold
      In music on the rainbow-dazzled shore
    Seemed telling, strangely telling, evermore
      A story that must still remain untold.

    Oh, _Once upon a time_, and o'er and o'er
      As aye the _Happy ever after_ came
    The enchanted waves lavished their faery lore

    And tossed a foam-bow and a rosy flame
      Around the whispers of the creaming foam,
    Till the old rapture with the new sweet name

    Through all the old romance began to roam,
      And Anwyl, gazing out across the sea,
    Dreamed that he heard the distance whisper "Come."

    "Etain," he murmured softly and wistfully,
      With the soul's wakening wonder in his eyes,
    "Is it not strange to think that there can be

    "No end for ever and ever to those skies,
      No shore beyond, or if there be a shore
    Still without end the world beyond it lies;

    "Think; think, Etain;" and all his faery lore
      Mixed with the faith that brought all gods to birth
    And sees new heavens transcend for evermore

    The poor impossibilities of earth;
      But Etain only laughed: the world to her
    Was one sweet smile of very present mirth;

    Its flowers were only flowers, common or rare;
      Her soul was like a little garden closed
    By rose-clad walls, a place of southern air
    Islanded from the Mystery that reposed
      Its vast and brooding wings on that abyss
    Through which like little clouds that dreamed and dozed

    The thoughts of Anwyl wandered toward some bliss
      Unknown, unfathomed, far, how far away,
    Where God has gathered all the eternities
      Into strange heavens, beyond the night and day.


    VIII

    And over the rolling golden bay,
    In the funeral pomp of the dying day,
      The bell of Time was wistfully tolling
    A million million years away;

    And over the heather-drowsy hill
    Where the burdened bees were buzzing still,
      The two little sun-bright barefoot children
    Wandered down at the flowers' own will;

    For still as the bell in the sunset tolled,
    The meadow-sweet and the mary-gold
      And the purple orchis kissed their ankles
    And lured them over the listening wold.

    And the feathery billows of blue-gold grass
    Bowed and murmured and bade them pass,
      Where a sigh of the sea-wind softly told them
    _There is no Time--Time never was_.

    And what if a sorrow were tolled to rest
    Where the rich light mellowed away in the West,
      As a glory of fruit in an autumn orchard
    Heaped and asleep o'er the sea's ripe breast?

    Why should they heed it, what should they know
    Of the years that come or the years that go,
      With the warm blue sky around and above them
    And the wild thyme whispering to and fro?

    For they heard in the dreamy dawn of day
    A fairy harper faintly play,
      Follow me, follow me, little children,
    Over the hills and far away;

    Where the dew is bright on the heather-bells,
    And the breeze in the clover sways and swells,
      As the waves on the blue sea wake and wander,
    Over and under the braes and dells.

    And the hare-bells tinkled and rang Ding dong
    Bell in the dell as they danced along,
      And their feet were stained on the hills with honey,
    And crushing the clover till evensong.

    And, oh the ripples that rolled in rhyme
    Under the wild blue banks of thyme,
      To the answering rhyme of the rolling ocean's
    Golden glory of change and chime!

    For they came to a stream and her fairy lover
    Caught at her hand and swung her over,
      And the broad wet buttercups laughed and gilded
    Their golden knees in the deep sweet clover.

    There was never a lavrock up in the skies
    Blithe as the laugh of their lips and eyes,
      As they glanced and glittered across the meadows
    To waken the sleepy butterflies.

    There was never a wave on the sea so gay
    As the light that danced on their homeward way
      Where the waving ferns were a fairy forest
    And a thousand years as yesterday.

        _She was eight years old that day,
        Full of laughter and play;
          Eight years old and Anwyl nine,--
        Two young lovers were they._

    And when the clouds like folded sheep
    Were drowsing over the drowsy deep,
      And like a rose in a golden cradle
    Anwyl breathed on the breast of sleep,

    Or ever the petals and leaves were furled
    At the vesper-song of the sunset-world,
      The sleepy young rose of nine sweet summers
    Dreamed in his rose-bed cosily curled.

    And what if the light of his nine bright years
    Glistened with laughter or glimmered with tears,
      Or gleamed like a mystic globe around him
    White as the light of the sphere of spheres?

    And what if a glory of angels there,
    Starring an orb of ineffable air,
      Came floating down from the Gates of jasper
    That melt into flowers at a maiden's prayer?

    And what if he dreamed of a fairy face
    Wondering out of some happy place,
      Quietly as a star at sunset
    Shines in the rosy dreams of space?

    For only as far as the west wind blows
    The sweets of a swinging full-blown rose,
      Eight years old and queen of the lilies
    Little Etain slept--ah, how close!

    At a flower-cry over the moonlit lane
    In a cottage of roses dreamed Etain,
      And their purple shadows kissed at her lattice
    And dappled her sigh-soft counterpane;

    And or ever Etain with her golden head
    Had nestled to sleep in her lily-white bed,
      She breathed a dream to her fairy lover,
    _Please, God, bless Anwyl and me_, she said.

    And a song arose in the rose-white West,
    And a whisper of wings o'er the sea's bright breast,
      And a cry where the moon's old miracle wakened
    A glory of pearl o'er the pine-forest.

    Why should they heed it? What should they know
    Of the years to come or the years to go?
      With the starry skies around and above them
    And the roses whispering to and fro.

    Ah, was it a song of the mystic morn
    When into their beating hearts the thorn
      Should pierce through the red wet crumpled roses
    And all the sorrow of love be born?

    Ah, was it a cry of the wild wayside
    Whereby one day they must surely ride,
      Out of the purple garden of passion
    To Calvary, to be crucified?

    Only the sound of the distant sea
    Broke on the shores of Mystery,
      And tolled as a bell might toll for sorrow
    Till Time be tombed in Eternity;

    And in their dreams they only heard
    Far away, one secret bird
      Sing, till the passionate purple twilight
    Throbbed with the wonder of one sweet word:

    One sweet word and the wonder awoke,
    And the leaves and the flowers and the starlight spoke
      In silent rapture the strange old secret
    That none e'er knew till the death-dawn broke;

    One sweet whisper, and hand in hand
    They wandered in dreams through fairyland,
      Rapt in the star-bright mystical music
    Which only a child can understand.

    But never a child in the world can tell
    The wonderful tale he knows so well,
      Though ever as old Time dies in the sunset
    It tolls and tolls like a distant bell.

    _Love, love, love_; and they hardly knew
    The sense of the glory that round them grew;
      But the world was a wide enchanted garden;
    And the song, the song, the song rang true.

    And they danced with the fairies in emerald rings
    Arched by the light of their rainbow wings,
      And they heard the wild green Harper striking
    A starlight over the golden strings.

    _Love, oh love_; and they roamed once more
    Through a forest of flowers on a fairy shore,
      And the sky was a wild bright laugh of wonder
    And the West was a dream of the years of yore.

    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end:
    The heather whispers low and sweet and low,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    The meadows murmur and the firwoods know
      The message that the kindling East shall send;
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.


    IX

    Out of the deep, my dream, out of the deep,
    Yrma, thy voice came to me in my sleep,
    And through a rainbow woven of human tears
    I saw two lovers wandering down the years;
    Two children, first, that roamed a sunset land,
    And then two lovers wandering hand in hand,
    Forgetful of their childhood's Paradise,
    For nine more years had darkened in their eyes,
    And heaven itself could hardly find again
    Anwyl, the star-child, or the flower, Etain.

    For on a day in May, as through the wood
    With earth's new passion beating in his blood
    He went alone, an empty-hearted youth,
    Seeking he knew not what white flower of truth
    Or beauty, on all sides he seemed to see
    Swift subtle hints of some new harmony,
    Yet all unheard, ideal, and incomplete,
    A silent song compact of hopes and fears,
    A music such as lights the wandering feet
    Of Yrma when on earth she reappears.
    And he forgot that sad grey City of Pain,
    For all earth's old romance returned again,
    And as he went, his dreaming soul grew glad
    To think that he might meet with Galahad
    Or Parsifal in some green glade of fern,
    Or see between the boughs a helmet burn
    And hear a joyous laugh kindle the sky
    As through the wood Sir Launcelot rode by
    With face upturned to take the sun like wine.
    Ah, was it love that made the whole world shine
    Like some great angel's face, blinded with bliss,
    While Anwyl dreamed of bold Sir Amadis
    And Guinevere's white arms and Iseult's kiss,
    And that glad island in a golden sea
    Where Arthur lives and reigns eternally?
    Surely the heavens were one wide rose-white flame
    As down the path to meet him Yrma came;
    Ah, was it Yrma, with those radiant eyes,
    That came to greet and lead him through the skies,
    The skies that gloomed and gleamed so far above
    The little wandering prayers of human love?...
    He had forgotten all except the gleam
    Of light when once he kissed her in a dream, ...
    For surely then he knew that long before
    Their eyes had met upon some distant shore....
    Ah, was it Yrma whose red lips he met
    Between the branches, where the leaves were wet?
    Etain or Yrma, for it seemed her face
    Bent down upon him from some happy place
    And whispered to him, low and sweet and low,
    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago!_
    And he, too, knew his love could never die,
    Because his queen was throned beyond the sky.

    Yet In sweet mortal eyes he met her now
    And kissed Etain beneath the hawthorn bough,
    And dared to dream his infinite dream was true
    On earth and reign with Etain, dream he knew
    Why leaves were green and sides were fresh and blue;
    Yea, dream he knew, as children dream they know
    They knew all this a million years ago,
      And watched the sea-waves wistfully westward wend
    And heard a voice whispering in their flow
    And calling through the silent sunset-glow
      _Love that hath no beginning hath no end._

    Ah, could they see in the Valley of Gloom
    That clove the cliffs behind the City;
    Ah, could they hear in the forest of Doom
    The peril that neared without pause or pity?
    Behind the veils of ivy and vine,
    Wild musk-roses and white woodbine,
    In glens that were wan as with moonlit tears
    And rosy with ghosts of eglantine
    And pale as with lilies of long-past years,
    Ah, could they see, could they hear, could they know
    Behind that beautiful outward show,
    Behind the pomp and glory of life
    That seething old anarchic strife?
    For there in many a dim blue glade
    Where the rank red poppies burned,
    And if perchance some dreamer strayed
    He nevermore returned,
    Cold incarnate memories
    Of earth's retributory throes,
    Deadly desires and agonies
    Dark as the worm that never dies,
    In the outer night arose,
    And waited under those wonderful skies
    With Hydra heads and mocking eyes
    That winked upon the waning West
    From out the gloom of the oak-forest,
    Till all the wild profound of wood
    That o'er the haunted valley slept
    Glowed with eyes like pools of blood
    As, lusting after a hideous food,
    Through the haggard vistas crept
    Without a cry, without a hiss,
    The serpent broods of the abyss.
    Ancestral folds in darkness furled
    Since the beginnings of the world.
    Ring upon awful ring uprose
    That obscure heritage of foes,
    The exceeding bitter heritage
    Which still a jealous God bestows
    From inappellable age to age,
    The ghostly worms that softly move
    Through every grey old corse of love
    And creep across the coffined years
    To batten on our blood and tears;
    And there were hooded shapes of death
    Gaunt and grey, cruel and blind,
    Stealing softly as a breath
    Through the woods that loured behind
    The City; hooded shapes of fear
    Slowly, slowly stealing near;
    While all the gloom that round them rolled
    With intertwisting coils grew cold.
    And there with leer and gap-toothed grin
    Many a gaunt ancestral Sin
    With clutching fingers, white and thin,
    Strove to put the boughs aside;
    And still before them all would glide
    Down the wavering moon-white track
    One lissom figure, clad in black;
    Who wept at mirth and mocked at pain
    And murmured a song of the wind and the rain;
    His laugh was wild with a secret grief;
    His eyes were deep like woodland pools;
    And, once and again, as his face drew near
    In a rosy gloaming of eglantere,
    All the ghosts that gathered there
    Bowed together, naming his name:
    Lead us, ah thou _Shadow of a Leaf_,
    Child and master of all our shame,
    Fool of Doubt and King of Fools.

    Now the linnet had ended his evensong,
    And the lark dropt down from his last wild ditty
    And ruffled his wings and his speckled breast
    Blossomwise over his June-sweet nest;
    While winging wistfully into the West
    As a fallen petal is wafted along
    The last white sea-mew sought for rest;
    And, over the gleaming heave and swell
    Of the swinging seas,
    Drowsily breathed the dreaming breeze.
    Then, suddenly, out of the Valley of Gloom
    That clove the cliffs behind the City,
    Out of the silent forest of Doom
    That clothed the valley with clouds of fear
    Swelled the boom of a distant bell
    Once, and the towers of the City of Pain
    Echoed it, without hope or pity.
    The tale of that tolling who can tell?
    That dark old music who shall declare?
    Who shall interpret the song of the bell?

    _Is it nothing to you, all ye that hear_,
    Sorrowed the bell, _Is it nothing to you?
    Is it nothing to you?_ the shore-wind cried,
    _Is it nothing to you?_ the cliffs replied.
    But the low light laughed and the skies were blue,
    And this was only the song of the bell.


    X

    ANWYL

    A darkened easement in a darker room
      Was all his home, whence weary and bowed and white
    He watched across the slowly gathering gloom
      The slowly westering light.

    Bitterness in his heavy-clouded eyes,
      Bitterness as of heaven's intestine wars
    Brooded; he looked upon the unfathomed skies
      And whispered--to the stars--

    Some day, he said, she will forget all this
      That she calls life, and looking far above
    See throned among the great eternities
      This dream of mine, this love;

    Love that has given my soul these wings of fire
      To beat in glory above the sapphire sea,
    Until the wings of the infinite desire
      Close in infinity;

    Love that has taken the glory of hawthorn boughs,
      And all the dreaming beauty of hazel skies,
    As ministers to the radiance of her brows
      And haunted April eyes;

    Love that is hidden so deep beneath the dust
      Of little daily duties and delights,
    Till that reproachful face of hers grows just
      And God at last requites

    A soul whose dream was deeper than the skies,
      A heart whose hope was wider than the sea,
    Yet could not enter through his true love's eyes
      Their grey infinity.

    And so I know I wound her all day long
      Because my heart must seem so far away;
    And even my love completes the silent wrong
      For all that it can say

    Seems vast and meaningless to mortal sense;
      Its vague desire can never reach its goal
    Till knowledge vanishes in omniscience
      And God surrounds her soul,
    Breaking its barriers down and flooding in
      Through all her wounds in one almighty tide,
    Mingling her soul with that great Love wherein
      My soul waits, glorified.


    XI

    ETAIN

    My love is dying, dying in my heart;
      There is no song in heaven for such as I
    Who watch the days and years of youth depart,
      The bloom decay and die;

    The rose that withers in the hollow cheek,
      The leaden rings that mark us old and wise;
    And Time that writes what Pity dares not speak
      Around the fading eyes.

    He dreams he loves; but only loves his dream;
      And in his dream he never can forget
    Abana seems a so much mightier stream
      And Pharpar wider yet;

    The little deeds of love that light the shrine
      Of common daily duties with such gleams
    Of heaven, to me are scarcely less divine
      Than those poor wandering dreams

    Of deeds that never happen! I give him this,
      This heart he cannot find in heaven above;
    This heart, this heart of all the eternities,
      This life of mine, this love;

    Love that is lord of all the world at once
      And never bade the encircled spirit roam
    To the circle's bound, beyond the moons and suns,
      But makes each heart its home,
    And every home the heart of Space and Time,
      And each and all a heaven if love could reign;
    One infinite untranscended heaven sublime
      With God's own joy and pain.

    Why, that was what God meant, to set us here
      In Eden, when he saw that all was good;
    And we have made the sun black with despair,
      And turned the moon to blood.

    So has Love taught me that too learnèd tongue,
      And in his poorer wisdom made me wise;
    I grew so proud of the red drops we wrung
      From all philosophies.

    My heart is narrow, foolish, what you will;
      But this I know God meant who set us here,
    And gave each soul the Infinities to fulfil
      From its own widening sphere.

    To annex new regions to the soul's domain,
      To expand the circle of the golden hours,
    Till it enfolds again and yet again
      New heavens, new fields, new flowers,

    Oh, this is well; but still the central heart
      Is here at home, not wandering like the wind
    That gathers nothing, but must still depart
      Leaving a waste behind.

    Where is the song I sang that April morn,
      When all the poet in his eyes awoke
    My sleeping heart to heaven; and love was born?
      For while the glad day broke

    We met; and as the softly kindling skies
      Thrilled through the scented vistas of the wood
    I felt the sudden love-light in his eyes
      Kindle my beating blood.

    _Happy day, happy day,
    Chasing the clouds of the night away
      And bidding the dreams of the dawn depart
    Over the freshening April blue,
      Till the blossoms awake to welcome the May,
    And the world is made anew;
      And the blackbird sings on the dancing spray
    With eyes of glistening dew;
      "Happy, happy, happy day;"
    For he knows that his love is true;
      He knows that his love is true, my heart,
    He knows that his love is true!_

    I cannot sing it: these tears blind me: love,
      O love, come back before it is too late,
    Why, even Christ came down to us from above:
      I think His love was great;

    Yet he stood knocking, knocking at the door
      Until his piteous hands were worn with scars;
    He did not hide that crown of love he wore
      Among the lonely stars.

    This round of hours, the daily flowers I cull
      Are more to me than all the rolling spheres,
    A wounded bird at hand more pitiful
      Than some great seraph's tears.

    How should I join the great wise choir above
      With my starved spirit's pale inhuman dearth,
    Who never heard the cry of heavenly love
      Rise from the sweet-souled earth?

    Yet it is I he needs, and I for whom
      His greed exceeds, his dreams fly wide of the mark!
    Is it all self? I wander in the gloom;
      The ways of God grow dark;
    I watch the rose that withers in the cheek,
      The leaden rings that mark us old and wise;
    And Time that writes what Pity dares not speak
      Around the fading eyes.


    XII

    And ever as Anwyl went the unknown end
      Faded before him, back and back and back
    He saw new empty heavens for ever bend
      Over his endless track;

    And memory, burning with new hopeless fire,
      Showed him how every passing infinite hour
    Made some new Crucifix for the World's Desire
      Is some new wayside flower:

    He saw what joy and beauty owed to death;
      How all the world was one great sacrifice
    Of Him, in whom all creatures that draw breath
      Share God's eternal skies;

    How Love is lord of all the world at once;
      And never bids the encircled spirit roam
    To the circle's bound, beyond the moons and suns,
      But makes each heart its home,

    And every home the heart of Space and Time,
      And each and all a heaven if love could reign
    One infinite untranscended heaven sublime
      With God's own joy and pain.


    XIII

    Out of the deep, my dream, out of the deep,
    A little child came to him in his sleep
    And led him back to what was Paradise
    Before the years had darkened in his eyes,
    And showed him what he ne'er could lose again--
    The light that once enshrined the child Etain.

    Ah, was it Yrma with those radiant eyes
    That came to greet and lead him through the skies;
    Ay; all the world was one wide rose-white flame,
    As down the path to meet him Yrma came
    And caught the child up in her arms and cried,
    This is my child that moved in Etain's side,
    Thy child and Etain's: I the unknown ideal
    And she the rich, the incarnate, breathing real
    Are one; for me thou never canst attain
    But by the love I yield thee for Etain;
    Even as through Christ thy soul allays its dearth,
    Love's heaven is only compassed upon earth;
    And by that love, in thine own Etain's eyes
    Thou shalt find all God's untranscended skies.

    As of old, as of old, with Etain that day,
    Over the hills, and far away,
      He roamed thro' the fairy forests of fern:
    Two young lovers were they.

    And God sighed in the sunset, and the sea
    Grew quieter than the hills: the mystery
    Of ocean, earth and sky was like a word
      Uttered, but all unheard,
    Uttered by every wave and cloud and leaf
    With all the immortal glory of mortal grief;
    And every wave that broke its heart of gold
      In music on the rainbow-dazzled shore
    Seemed telling, strangely telling, evermore
      A story that must still remain untold.

    Oh, _Once upon a time_, and o'er and o'er
      As aye the _Happy ever after_ came
    The enchanted waves lavished their faery lore

    And tossed a foam-bow and a rosy flame
      Around the whispers of the creaming foam,
    Till the old rapture with the new sweet name
      Through all the old romance began to roam.


    XIV

    And those two lovers only heard
      --Oh, love is a dream that knows no waking--
    Far away, one secret bird,
    Where all the roses breathed one word,
    And every crispel on the beach--
      Oh, love is a sea that is ever breaking!--
    Lisped it in a sweeter speech;
    As hand in hand, by the sunset sea
    That breaks on the shores of mystery,
    They stood in the gates of the City of Pain
    To watch the wild waves flutter and beat
    In roses of white soft light at their feet,
    Roses of delicate music and light,
    Music and moonlight under their feet.
    Crumbling and flashing and softly crashing
    In rainbow colours that dazzle and wane
    And wither and waken and, wild with delight,
    Dance and dance to a mystic tune
    And scatter their leaves in a flower-soft rain
    Over the shimmering golden shore
    Between the West and the waking moon,
    Between the sunset and the night;
    And then they sigh for the years of yore
    And gather their glory together again,
    Petal by petal and gleam by gleam,
    Till, all in one rushing rose-bright stream
    They dazzle back to the deep once more,
    For the dream of the sea is an endless dream,
    And love is a sea that hath no shore,
    And the roses dance as they danced before.


    XV

    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end:
    Low to her heart he breathed it, sweet and low;
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    This is a word that all the sea-waves know
      And whisper as through the shoreless West they wend,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago:
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end.


    XVI

    "Yet love can die!" she murmured once again;
      For this was in that City by the Sea,
    That old grey City of Pain,
      Built on the shifting shores of Mystery
    And mocked by all the immeasurable main.
      "Love lives to die!"
    Under the deep eternal sky
      His deeper voice caught up that deep refrain;

    "A year ago, and under yonder sun
    Earth had no Heaven to hold our hearts in one!
      For me there was no love, afar or nigh:
    And, O, if love were thus in time begun,
      Love, even our love, in time must surely die."
    Then memory murmured, "No";
    And he remembered, a million years ago,
      He saw the sea-waves wistfully westward wend;
    And heard her voice whispering in their flow
    And calling through the silent sunset-glow.
      _Love that hath no beginning hath no end._

    "Love dies to live!" How wild, how deep the joy
    That knows no death can e'er destroy
      What cannot bear destruction! By these eyes
      I know that, ere the fashioning of the skies,
    Or ever the sun and moon and stars were made
    I loved you. Sweet, I am no more afraid.

    "Love lives to die!"
    Under the deep eternal sky
      Her wild sweet voice caught up that deep refrain:
    There, in that silent City by the Sea,
    Listening the wild-wave music of Infinity,
      There, in that old grey City of mortal pain,
    Their voices mingled in mystic unison
      With that immortal harmony
    Which holds the warring worlds in one.

    Their Voice, one Voice, yet manifold,
    Possessed the seas, the fields, the sky,
    With utterance of the dream that cannot die;
    Possessed the West's wild rose and dappled gold,
    And that old secret of the setting sun
    Which, to the glory of Eternity,
    Time, tolling like a distant bell,
    Evermore faints to tell,
    And, ever telling, never yet has told.
      One, and yet manifold
    Arose their Voice, oh strangely one again
    With murmurs of the immeasurable main;
      As, far beyond earth's cloudy bars,
    Their Soul surpassed the sunset and the stars,
      And all the heights and depths of temporal pain,
    Till seas of seraph music round them rolled.

    And in that mystic plane
    They felt their mortal years
    Break away as a dream of pain
    Breaks in a stream of tears.

    Love, of whom life had birth,
    See now, is death not sweet?
    Love, is this heaven or earth?
    Both are beneath thy feet.

    Nay, both within thy heart!
    O Love, the glory nears;
    The Gates of Pearl are flung apart,
    The Rose of Heaven appears.

    Across the deeps of change,
    Like pangs of visible song,
    What angel-spirits, remote and strange,
    Thrill through the starry throng?

    And oh, what wind that blows
    Over the mystic Tree,
    What whisper of the sacred Rose,
    What murmur of the sapphire Sea,
    What dreams that faint and fail
    From harps of burning gold,
    But tell in heaven the sweet old tale
    An earthly sunset told?

    Hark! like a holy bell
    Over that spirit Sea,
    Time, in the world it loves so well,
    Tolls for Eternity.

    Earth calls us once again,
    And, through the mystic Gleam,
    The grey old City of mortal pain
    Dawns on the heavenly dream.

    Sweet as the voice of birds
    At dawn, the years return,
    With little songs and sacred words
    Of human hearts that yearn.

    The sweet same waves resound
    Along our earthly shore;
    But now this earth we lost and found
    Is heaven for evermore.

    Hark! how the cosmic choir,
    In sea and flower and sun,
    Recalls that triumph of desire
    Which made all music one:

    One universal soul,
    Completing joy with pain,
    And harmonising with the Whole
    The temporal refrain,

    Until from hill and plain,
    From bud and blossom and tree,
    From shadow and shining after rain,
    From cloud and clovered bee,
    From earth and sea and sky,
    From laughter and from tears,
    One molten golden harmony
    Fulfils the yearning years.

    _Love, of whom death had birth,
    See now, is life not sweet?
    Love, is this heaven or earth?
    Both are beneath thy feet._

    _In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end;
    The sea-waves whisper, low and sweet and low,
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
    The May-boughs murmur and the roses know
      The message that the dawning moon shall send;
    In other worlds I loved you, long ago;
      Love that hath no beginning hath no end._




THE FOREST OF WILD THYME

_DEDICATED TO HELEN, ROSIE, AND BEATRIX_



    PERSONS OF THE TALE

    OURSELVES
    FATHER
    MOTHER
    LITTLE BOY BLUE
    THE HIDEOUS HERMIT
    THE KING OF FAIRY-LAND
    PEASE-BLOSSOM
    MUSTARD-SEED
    Dragons, Fairies, Mammoths, Angels, etc.


APOLOGIA

    One more hour to wander free
    With Puck on his unbridled bee
      Thro' heather-forests, leagues of bloom,
    Our childhood's maze of scent and sun!
      Forbear awhile your notes of doom,
    Dear Critics, give me still this one
      Swift hour to hunt the fairy gleam
      That flutters thro' the unfettered dream.
    It mocks me as it flies, I know:
    All too soon the gleam will go;
      Yet I love it and shall love
    My dream that brooks no narrower bars
      Than bind the darkening heavens above,
    My Jack o'Lanthorn of the stars:
      Then, I'll follow it no more,
      I'll light the lamp: I'll close the door.


PRELUDE

    Hush! if you remember how we sailed to old Japan,
      Peterkin was with us then, our little brother Peterkin!
    Now we've lost him, so they say: I think the tall thin man
    Must have come and touched him with his curious twinkling fan
      And taken him away again, our merry little Peterkin;
    He'll be frightened all alone; we'll find him if we can;
      Come and look for Peterkin, poor little Peterkin.

    No one would believe us if we told them what we know,
      Or they wouldn't grieve for Peterkin, merry little Peterkin!
    If they'd only watched us roaming through the streets of Miyako,
    And travelling in a palanquin where parents never go,
      And seen the golden gardens where we wandered once with Peterkin,
    And smelt the purple orchards where the cherry-blossoms blow,
      They wouldn't mourn for Peterkin, merry little Peterkin.

    Put away your muskets, lay aside the drum,
      Hang it by the wooden sword we made for little Peterkin!
    He was once our trumpeter, now his bugle's dumb,
    Pile your arms beneath it, for the owlet light is come,
      We'll wander through the roses where we marched of old with Peterkin,
    We'll search the summer sunset where the Hybla beehives hum,
      And--if we meet a fairy there--we'll ask for news of Peterkin.

    He was once our cabin-boy and cooked the sweets for tea;
      And O, we've sailed around the world with laughing little Peterkin;
    From nursery floor to pantry door we've roamed the mighty sea,
    And come to port below the stairs in distant Caribee,
      But wheresoe'er we sailed we took our little lubber Peterkin,
    Because his wide grey eyes believed much more than ours could see,
      And so we liked our Peterkin, our trusty little Peterkin.

    Peterkin, Peterkin, I think if you came back
      The captain of our host to-day should be the bugler Peterkin,
    And he should lead our smugglers up that steep and narrow track,
    A band of noble brigands, bearing each a mighty pack
      Crammed with lace and jewels to the secret cave of Peterkin,
    And he should wear the biggest boots and make his pistol crack,--
      The Spanish cloak, the velvet mask, we'd give them all to Peterkin.

    Come, my brother pirates, I am tired of play;
      Come and look for Peterkin, little brother Peterkin,
    Our merry little comrade that the fairies took away,
    For people think we've lost him, and when we come to say
      Our good-night prayers to mother, if we pray for little Peterkin
    Her eyes are very sorrowful, she turns her head away.
      Come and look for Peterkin, merry little Peterkin.

    God bless little Peterkin, wherever he may be!
      Come and look for Peterkin, lonely little Peterkin:
    I wonder if they've taken him again across the sea
    From the town of Wonder-Wander and the Amfalula tree
      To the land of many marvels where we roamed of old with Peterkin,
    The land of blue pagodas and the flowery fields of tea!
      Come and look for Peterkin, poor little Peterkin.


PART I

THE SPLENDID SECRET

    Now father stood engaged in talk
    With mother on that narrow walk
    Between the laurels (where we play
    At Red-skins lurking for their prey)
    And the grey old wall of roses
    Where the Persian kitten dozes
    And the sunlight sleeps upon
    Crannies of the crumbling stone
    --So hot it is you scarce can bear
    Your naked hand upon it there,
    Though there luxuriating in heat
    With a slow and gorgeous beat
    White-winged currant-moths display
    Their spots of black and gold all day.--

    Well, since we greatly wished to know
    Whether we too might some day go
    Where little Peterkin had gone
    Without one word and all alone,
    We crept up through the laurels there
    Hoping that we might overhear
    The splendid secret, darkly great,
    Of Peterkin's mysterious fate;
    And on what high adventure bound
    He left our pleasant garden-ground,
    Whether for old Japan once more
    He voyaged from the dim blue shore,
    Or whether he set out to run
    By candle-light to Babylon.

    We just missed something father said
    About a young prince that was dead,
    A little warrior that had fought
    And failed: how hopes were brought to nought
    He said, and mortals made to bow
     Before the Juggernaut of Death,
    And all the world was darker now,
     For Time's grey lips and icy breath
    Had blown out all the enchanted lights
    That burned in Love's Arabian nights;
    And now he could not understand
    Mother's mystic fairy-land,
    "Land of the dead, poor fairy-tale,"
    He murmured, and her face grew pale,
    And then with great soft shining eyes
    She leant to him--she looked so wise--
    And, with her cheek against his cheek,
    We heard her, ah so softly, speak.

    "Husband, there was a happy day,
    Long ago, in love's young May,
    When with a wild-flower in your hand
      You echoed that dead poet's cry--
    '_Little flower, but if I could understand!_'
      And you saw it had roots in the depths of the sky,
    And there in that smallest bud lay furled
    The secret and meaning of all the world."

    He shook his head and then he tried
    To kiss her, but she only cried
    And turned her face away and said,
    "You come between me and my dead!
    His soul is near me, night and day,
    But you would drive it far away;
    And you shall never kiss me now
    Until you lift that brave old brow
    Of faith I know so well; or else
    Refute the tale the skylark tells,
    Tarnish the glory of that May,
    Explain the Smallest Flower away."
    And still he said, "Poor fairy-tales,
    How terribly their starlight pales
    Before the solemn sun of truth
    That rises o'er the grave of youth!"

    "Is heaven a fairy-tale?" she said,--
    And once again he shook his head;
    And yet we ne'er could understand
    Why heaven should _not_ be fairy-land,
    A part of heaven at least, and why
    The thought of it made mother cry,
    And why they went away so sad,
      And father still quite unforgiven,
    For what could children be but glad
      To find a fairy-land in heaven?

    And as we talked it o'er we found
    Our brains were really spinning round;
    But Dick, our eldest, late returned
    From school, by all the lore he'd learned
    Declared that we should seek the lost
    Smallest Flower at any cost.
    For, since within its leaves lay furled
    The secret of the whole wide world,
    He thought that we might learn therein
    The whereabouts of Peterkin;
    And, if we found the Flower, we knew
    Father would be forgiven, too;
    And mother's kiss atone for all
    The quarrel by the rose-hung wall;
    We knew, not how we knew not why,
      But Dick it was who bade us try,
    Dick made it all seem plain and clear,
    And Dick it is who helps us here
    To tell this tale of fairy-land
    In words we scarce can understand.
    For ere another golden hour
      Had passed, our anxious parents found
      We'd left the scented garden-ground
    To seek--the Smallest Flower.


PART II

THE FIRST DISCOVERY

    O, grown-ups cannot understand
      And grown-ups never will,
    How short's the way to fairy-land
      Across the purple hill:
    They smile: their smile is very bland,
      Their eyes are wise and chill;
    And yet--at just a child's command--
      The world's an Eden still.

    Under the cloudy lilac-tree,
      Out at the garden-gate,
    We stole, a little band of three,
      To tempt our fairy fate.
    There was no human eye to see,
      No voice to bid us wait;
    The gardener had gone home to tea,
      The hour was very late.

    I wonder if you've ever dreamed,
      In summer's noonday sleep,
    Of what the thyme and heather seemed
      To ladybirds that creep
    Like little crimson shimmering gems
    Between the tiny twisted stems
      Of fairy forests deep;
    And what it looks like as they pass
    Through jungles of the golden grass.

    If you could suddenly become
      As small a thing as they,
    A midget-child, a new Tom Thumb,
      A little gauze-winged fay,
    Oh then, as through the mighty shades
    Of wild thyme woods and violet glades
      You groped your forest-way,
    How fraught each fragrant bough would be
    With dark o'erhanging mystery.

    How high the forest aisles would loom,
      What wondrous wings would beat
    Through gloamings loaded with perfume
      In many a rich retreat,
    While trees like purple censers bowed
    And swung beneath a swooning cloud
      Mysteriously sweet,
    Where flowers that haunt no mortal clime
    Burden the Forest of Wild Thyme.

    We'd watched the bats and beetles flit
      Through sunset-coloured air
    The night that we discovered it
      And all the heavens were bare:
    We'd seen the colours melt and pass
    Like silent ghosts across the grass
      To sleep--our hearts knew where;
    And so we rose, and hand in hand
    We sought the gates of fairy-land.

    For Peterkin, oh Peterkin,
      The cry was in our ears,
    A fairy clamour, clear and thin
      From lands beyond the years;
    A wistful note, a dying fall
    As of the fairy bugle-call
      Some dreamful changeling hears,
    And pines within his mortal home
    Once more through fairy-land to roam.

    We left behind the pleasant row
      Of cottage window-panes,
    The village inn's red-curtained glow,
      The lovers in the lanes;
    And stout of heart and strong of will
    We climbed the purple perfumed hill,
      And hummed the sweet refrains
    Of fairy tunes the tall thin man
    Taught us of old in Old Japan.

    So by the tall wide-barred church-gate
      Through which we all could pass
    We came to where that curious plate,
      That foolish plate of brass,
    Said Peterkin was fast asleep
    Beneath a cold and ugly heap
      Of earth and stones and grass.
    It was a splendid place for play,
    That churchyard, on a summer's day;

    A splendid place for hide-and-seek
      Between the grey old stones;
    Where even grown-ups used to speak
      In awestruck whispering tones;
    And here and there the grass ran wild
    In jungles for the creeping child,
      And there were elfin zones
    Of twisted flowers and words in rhyme
    And great sweet cushions of wild thyme.

    So in a wild thyme snuggery there
      We stayed awhile to rest;
    A bell was calling folk to prayer:
      One star was in the West:
    The cottage lights grew far away,
    The whole sky seemed to waver and sway
      Above our fragrant nest;
    And from a distant dreamland moon
    Once more we heard that fairy tune:

    Why, mother once had sung it us
      When, ere we went to bed,
    She told the tale of Pyramus,
      How Thisbe found him dead
    And mourned his eyes as green as leeks,
    His cherry nose, his cowslip cheeks.

    That tune would oft around us float
      Since on a golden noon
    We saw the play that Shakespeare wrote
      Of Lion, Wall, and Moon;
    Ah, hark--the ancient fairy theme--
    _Following darkness like a dream!_

    The very song Will Shakespeare sang,
    The music that through Sherwood rang
    And Arden and that forest glade
    Where Hermie and Lysander strayed,
    And Puck cried out with impish glee,
    _Lord, what fools these mortals be!_
    Though the masquerade was mute
    Of Quince and Snout and Snug and Flute,
    And Bottom with his donkey's head
    Decked with roses, white and red,
    Though the fairies had forsaken
    Sherwood now and faintly shaken
    The forest-scents from off their feet,
    Yet from some divine retreat
    Came the music, sweet and clear,
    To hang upon the raptured ear
    With the free unfettered sway
    Of blossoms in the moon of May.
    Hark! the luscious fluttering
    Of flower-soft words that kiss and cling,
    And part again with sweet farewells,
    And rhyme and chime like fairy-bells.

    "_I know a bank where the wild thyme blows
    Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
    Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
    With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine._"

    Out of the undiscovered land
      So sweetly rang the song,
    We dreamed we wandered, hand in hand,
      The fragrant aisles along,
    Where long ago had gone to dwell
    In some enchanted distant dell
      The outlawed fairy throng
    When out of Sherwood's wildest glen
    They sank, forsaking mortal men.

    And as we dreamed, the shadowy ground
      Seemed gradually to swell;
    And a strange forest rose around,
      But how--we could not tell--
    Purple against a rose-red sky
    The big boughs brooded silently:
      Far off we heard a bell;
    And, suddenly, a great red light
    Smouldered before our startled sight.

    Then came a cry, a fiercer flash,
      And down between the trees
    We saw great crimson figures crash,
      Wild-eyed monstrosities;
    Great dragon-shapes that breathed a flame
    From roaring nostrils as they came:
      We sank upon our knees;
    And looming o'er us, ten yards high,
    Like battle-ships they thundered by.

    And then, as down that mighty dell
      We followed, faint with fear,
    We understood the tolling bell
      That called the monsters there;
    For right in front we saw a house
    Woven of wild mysterious boughs
      Bursting out everywhere
    In crimson flames, and with a shout
    The monsters rushed to put it out.

    And, in a flash, the truth was ours;
      And there we knew--we knew--
    The meaning of those trees like flowers,
      Those boughs of rose and blue,
    And from the world we'd left above
    A voice came crooning like a dove
      To prove the dream was true:
    And this--we knew it by the rhyme
    Must be--the Forest of Wild Thyme.

    For out of the mystical rose-red dome
      Of heaven the voice came murmuring down:
    _Oh, Ladybird, Ladybird, fly away home;
      Your house is on fire and your children are gone._

    We knew, we knew it by the rhyme,
      Though _we_ seemed, after all,
    No tinier, yet the sweet wild thyme
      Towered like a forest tall
    All round us; oh, we knew not how.
    And yet--we knew those monsters now:
      Our dream's divine recall
    Had dwarfed us, as with magic words;
    The dragons were but ladybirds!

    And all around us as we gazed,
    Half glad, half frightened, all amazed,
    The scented clouds of purple smoke
    In lurid gleams of crimson broke;
    And o'er our heads the huge black trees
    Obscured the sky's red mysteries;
    While here and there gigantic wings
    Beat o'er us, and great scaly things
    Fold over monstrous leathern fold
    Out of the smouldering copses rolled;
    And eyes like blood-red pits of flame
    From many a forest-cavern came
    To glare across the blazing glade,
    Till, with the sudden thought dismayed,
    We wondered if we e'er should find
    The mortal home we left behind:
    Fear clutched us in a grisly grasp,
    We gave one wild and white-lipped gasp,
    Then turned and ran, with streaming hair,
    Away, away, and anywhere!

    And hurry-skurry, heart and heel and hand, we tore along,
      And still our flying feet kept time and pattered on for Peterkin,
    For Peterkin, oh Peterkin, it made a kind of song
    To prove the road was right although it seemed so dark and wrong,
      As through the desperate woods we plunged and ploughed for little
        Peterkin,
    Where many a hidden jungle-beast made noises like a gong
      That rolled and roared and rumbled as we rushed along to Peterkin.

    Peterkin, Peterkin, if you could only hear
      And answer us, one little word from little lonely Peterkin
    To take and comfort father, he is sitting in his chair
      In the library: he's listening for your footstep on the stair
    And your patter down the passage, he can only think of Peterkin:
    Come back, come back to father, for to-day he'd let us tear
      His newest book to make a paper-boat for little Peterkin.


PART III

THE HIDEOUS HERMIT

    Ah, what wonders round us rose
      When we dared to pause and look,
    Curious things that seemed all toes,
      Goblins from a picture-book;
    Ants like witches, four feet high,
      Waving all their skinny arms,
    Glared at us and wandered by,
      Muttering their ancestral charms.

    Stately forms in green and gold
      Armour strutted through the glades,
    Just as Hamlet's ghost, we're told,
      Mooned among the midnight shades:

    Once a sort of devil came
    Scattering broken trees about,
    Winged with leather, eyed with flame,--
      He was but a moth, no doubt.

    Here and there, above us clomb
      Feathery clumps of palm on high:
    Those were ferns, of course, but some
      Really seemed to touch the sky;
    Yes; and down one fragrant glade,
      Listening as we onward stole,
    Half delighted, half afraid,
      _Dong_, we heard the hare-bells toll!

    Something told us what that gleam
      Down the glen was brooding o'er;
    Something told us in a dream
      What the bells were tolling for!
    Something told us there was fear,
      Horror, peril, on our way!
    Was it far or was it near?
      _Near_, we heard the night-wind say.

    _Toll_, the music reeled and pealed
      Through the vast and sombre trees,
    Where a rosy light revealed
      Dimmer, sweeter mysteries;
    And, like petals of the rose,
      Fairy fans in beauty beat,
    Light in light--ah, what were those
      Rhymes we heard the night repeat?

    _Toll_, a dream within a dream,
      Up an aisle of rose and blue,
    Up the music's perfumed stream
      Came the words, and then we knew,

    Knew that in that distant glen
      Once again the case was tried,
    Hark!--_Who killed Cock Robin, then?_
      And a tiny voice replied,
              "_I
              killed
              Cock
              Robin!_"

    "_I!_ And who are _You_, sir, pray?"
      Growled a voice that froze our marrow:
    "Who!" we heard the murderer say,
      "Lord, sir, I'm the famous Sparrow,
    And this 'ere's my bow and arrow!
              _I
              killed
              Cock
              Robin!_"

    Then, with one great indrawn breath,
      Such a sighin' and a sobbin'
    Rose all round us for the death
      Of poor, poor Cock Robin,
    Oh, we couldn't bear to wait
    Even to hear the murderer's fate,
    Which we'd often wished to know
    Sitting in the fireside glow
    And with hot revengeful looks
    Searched for in the nursery-books;
    For the Robin and the Wren
    Are such friends to mortal men,
      Such dear friends to mortal men!

    _Toll_; and through the woods once more
      Stole we, drenched with fragrant dew:
    _Toll_; the hare-bell's burden bore
      Deeper meanings than we knew:
    Still it told us there was fear,
      Horror, peril on our way!
    Was it far or was it near?
      _Near_, we heard the night-wind say!

    _Near_; and once or twice we saw
      Something like a monstrous eye,
    Something like a hideous claw
      Steal between us and the sky:
    Still we hummed a dauntless tune
      Trying to think such things might be
    Glimpses of the fairy moon
      Hiding in some hairy tree.

    Yet around us as we went
     Through the glades of rose and blue
    Sweetness with the horror blent
      Wonder-wild in scent and hue:
    Here Aladdin's cavern yawned,
      Jewelled thick with gorgeous dyes;
    There a head of clover dawned
      Like a cloud In eastern skies.

    Hills of topaz, lakes of dew,
      Fairy cliffs of crystal sheen
    Passed we; and the forest's blue
      Sea of branches tossed between:
    Once we saw a gryphon make
      One soft iris as it passed
    Like the curving meteor's wake
      O'er the forest, far and fast.

    Winged with purple, breathing flame,
      Crimson-eyed we saw him go,
    Where--ah! could it be the same
      Cockchafer we used to know?--
    Valley-lilies overhead,
      High aloof in clustered spray,
    Far through heaven their splendour spread,
      Glimmering like the Milky Way.

    Mammoths father calls "extinct,"
      Creatures that the cave-men feared,
    Through that forest walked and blinked,
      Through that jungle crawled and leered;
    Beasts no Nimrod ever knew,
      Woolly bears black and red;
    Crocodiles, we wondered who
      Ever dared to see _them_ fed,

    Were they lizards? If they were,
      They could swallow _us_ with ease;
    But they slumbered quietly there
      In among the mighty trees;
    Red and silver, blue and green,
      Played the moonlight on their scales;
    Golden eyes they had, and lean
      Crookèd legs with cruel nails.

    Yet again, oh, faint and far,
      Came the shadow of a cry,
    Like the calling of a star
      To its brother in the sky;
    Like an echo in a cave
      Where young mermen sound their shells,
    Like the wind across a grave
      Bright with scent of lily-bells.

    Like a fairy hunter's horn
      Sounding in some purple glen
    Sweet revelly to the morn
      And the fairy quest again:
    Then, all round it surged a song
      We could never understand
    Though it lingered with us long,
      And it seemed so sad and grand.


SONG

    _Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,
    Summon the day of deliverance in:
    We are weary of bearing the burden of scorn
      As we yearn for the home that we never shall win;
    For here there is weeping and sorrow and sin.
      And the poor and the weak are a spoil for the strong!
    Ah, when shall the song of the ransomed begin?
      The world is grown weary with waiting so long._

    _Little Boy Blue, you are gallant and brave,
      There was never a doubt in those clear bright eyes.
    Come, challenge the grim dark Gates of the Grave
      As the skylark sings to those infinite skies!
    This world is a dream, say the old and the wise,
      And its rainbows arise o'er the false and the true;
    But the mists of the morning are made of our sighs,--
      Ah, shatter them, scatter them, Little Boy Blue!_

    _Little Boy Blue, if the child-heart knows,
      Sound but a note as a little one may;
    And the thorns of the desert shall bloom with the rose,
      And the Healer shall wipe all tears away;
    Little Boy Blue, we are all astray,
      The sheep's in the meadow, the cow's in the corn,
    Ah, set the world right, as a little one may;
      Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn!_

    Yes; and there between the trees
      Circled with a misty gleam
    Like the light a mourner sees
      Round an angel in a dream;
    Was it he? oh, brave and slim,
      Straight and clad in æry blue,
    Lifting to his lips the dim
      Golden horn? We never knew!

    Never; for a witch's hair
      Flooded all the moonlit sky,
    And he vanished, then and there,
      In the twinkling of an eye:
    Just as either boyish cheek
      Puffed to set the world aright,
    Ere the golden horn could speak
      Round him flowed the purple night.

       *   *   *   *

    At last we came to a round black road
    That tunnelled through the woods and showed,
    Or so we thought, a good clear way
    Back to the upper lands of day;
    Great silken cables overhead
    In many a mighty mesh were spread
    Netting the rounded arch, no doubt
    To keep the weight of leafage out.
    And, as the tunnel narrowed down,
    So thick and close the cords had grown
    No leaf could through their meshes stray,
    And the faint moonlight died away;
    Only a strange grey glimmer shone
    To guide our weary footsteps on,
    Until, tired out, we stood before
    The end, a great grey silken door.

    Then from out a weird old wicket, overgrown with shaggy hair
    Like a weird and wicked eyebrow round a weird and wicked eye,
                  Two great eyeballs and a beard
                  For one ghastly moment peered
    At our faces with a sudden stealthy stare:
                  Then the door was open wide,
                  And a hideous hermit cried
    With a shy and soothing smile from out his lair,
    _Won't you walk into my parlour? I can make you cosy there!_

    And we couldn't quite remember where we'd heard that phrase before,
    As the great grey-bearded ogre stood beside his open door;
    But an echo seemed to answer from a land beyond the sky--
    _Won't you walk into my parlour? said the spider to the fly!_

    Then we looked a little closer at the ogre as he stood
    With his great red eyeballs glowing like two torches in a wood,
    And his mighty speckled belly and his dreadful clutching claws
    And his nose--a horny parrot's beak, his whiskers and his jaws;
    Yet he seemed so sympathetic, and we saw two tears descend,
    As he murmured, "I'm so ugly, but I've lost my dearest friend!
    I tell you most lymphatic'ly, I've yearnings in my soul,"--
    And right along his parrot's beak we saw the tear-drops roll;
    _He's an arrant sentimentalist_, we heard a distant sigh,
    _Won't you weep upon my bosom? said the spider to the fly._

    "If you'd dreamed my dreams of beauty, if you'd seen my works of art,
    If you'd felt the cruel hunger that is gnawing at my heart,
    And the grief that never leaves me and the love I can't forget,
    (For I loved with all the letters in the Chinese alphabet!)
    Oh, you'd all come in to comfort me: you ought to help the weak;
    And I'm full of melting moments; and--I--know--the--thing--you--seek!"
    And the haunting echo answered, _Well, I'm sure you ought to try;
    There's a duty to one's neighbour, said the spider to the fly._

    So we walked into his parlour
      Though a gleam was in his eye;
    And it _was_ the prettiest parlour
      That ever we did spy!

              But we saw by the uncertain
                Misty light, shot through with gleams
              Of many a silken curtain
                Broidered o'er with dreadful dreams,
    That he locked the door behind us! So we stood with bated breath
                In a silence deep as death.

              There were scarlet gleams and crimson
                In the curious foggy grey,
              Like the blood-red light that swims on
                Old canals at fall of day,
    Where the smoke of some great city loops and droops in gorgeous veils
                Round the heavy purple barges' tawny sails.

              Were those creatures gagged and muffled,
                See--there--by that severed head?
              Was it but a breeze that ruffled
                Those dark curtains, splashed with red,
    Ruffled the dark figures on them, made them moan like things in pain?
                How we wished that we were safe at home again.

       *   *   *   *

    "Oh, we want to hear of Peterkin; good sir, you say you know;
    Won't you tell us, won't you put us in the way we want to go?"
    So we pleaded, for he seemed so very full of sighs and tears
    That we couldn't doubt his kindness, and we smothered all our fears;
    But he said, "You must be crazy if you come to me for help;
    Why should I desire to send you to your horrid little whelp?"
    And again, the foolish echo made a far-away reply,
                _Oh, don't come to me for comfort,
                Pray don't look to me for comfort,
    Heavens! you mustn't be so selfish, said the spider to the fly._

    "Still, when the King of Scotland, so to speak, was in a hole,
    He was aided by my brother; it's a story to console
    The convict of the treadmill and the infant with a sum,
    For it teaches you to try again until your kingdom's come!
    The monarch dawdled in that hole for centuries of time
    Until my own twin-brother rose and showed him how to climb:
    He showed him how to swing and sway upon a tiny thread
    Across a mighty precipice, and light upon his head
    Without a single fracture and without a single pain
    If he only did it frequently and tried and tried again:"
    And once again the whisper like a moral wandered by,
    _Perseverance is a virtue, said the spider to the fly._

    Then he moaned, "My heart is hungry; but I fear I cannot eat,
    (Of course I speak entirely now of spiritual meat!)
    For I only fed an hour ago, but if we calmly sat
    While I told you all my troubles in a confidential chat
    It would give me _such_ an appetite to hear you sympathise,
    And I should sleep the better--see, the tears are in my eyes!
    Dead yearnings are such dreadful things, let's keep 'em all alive,--
    Let's sit and talk awhile, my dears; we'll dine, I think, at five."
    And he brought his chair beside us in his most engaging style,
    And began to tell his story with a melancholy smile.--

    "You remember Miss Muffet
    Who sat on a tuffet
    Partaking of curds and whey;
    Well, _I_ am the spider
    Who sat down beside her
      And frightened Miss Muffet away!

    "There was nothing against her!
    An elderly spinster
      Were such a grammatical mate
    For a spider and spinner,
    I swore I would win her,
      I knew I had met with my fate!

    "That love was the purest
    And strongest and surest
      I'd felt since my first thread was spun;
    I know I'm a bogey,
    But _she's_ an old fogey,
      So why in the world did she run?

    "When Bruce was in trouble,
    A spider, my double,
      Encouraged him greatly, they say!
    Now, _why_ should the spider
    Who sat down beside her
      Have frightened Miss Muffet away?"

    He seemed to have much more to tell,
    But we could scarce be listening well,
    Although we tried with all our might
    To look attentive and polite;
    For still afar we heard the thin
    Clear fairy-call to Peterkin;
    Clear as a skylark's mounting song
    It drew our wandering thoughts along.
    Afar, it seemed, yet, ah, so nigh,
    Deep in our dreams it scaled the sky,
    In captive dreams that brooked no bars
    It touched the love that moves the stars,
    And with sweet music's golden tether
    It bound our hearts and heaven together.


SONG

    _Wake, arise, the lake, the skies
      Fade into the faery day;
    Come and sing before our king,
      Heed not Time, the dotard grey;
    Time has given his crown to heaven--
      Ah, how long? Awake, away!_

    Then, as the Hermit rambled on
    In one long listless monotone,
    We heard a wild and mournful groan
    Come rumbling down the tunnelled way;
    A voice, an awful mournful bray,
    Singing some old funereal lay;
    Then solemn footsteps, muffled, dull,
    Approached as if they trod on wool,
    And as they nearer, nearer drew,
    We saw our Host was listening too!

    His bulging eyes began to glow
      Like great red match-heads rubbed at night,
    And then he stole with a grim "O-ho!"
      To that grey old wicket where, out of sight,
    Blandly rubbing his hands and humming,
    He could see, at one glance, whatever was coming.

    He had never been so jubilant or frolicsome before,
    As he scurried on his cruel hairy crutches to the door;
                  And flung it open wide
                  And most hospitably cried,
    "Won't you walk into my parlour? I've some little friends to tea,--
    They'll be highly entertaining to a man of sympathy,
                  Such as you yourself must be!"

    Then the man, for so he seemed,
      (Doubtless one who'd lost his way
    And was dwarfed as we had been!)
      In his ancient suit of black,
    Black upon the verge of green,
      Entered like a ghost that dreamed
    Sadly of some bygone day;
      And he never ceased to sing
    In that awful mournful bray.

    The door closed behind his back;
      He walked round us in a ring,
    And we hoped that he might free us,
      But his tears appeared to blind him,
    For he didn't seem to see us,
      And the Hermit crept behind him
    Like a cat about to spring.

    And the song he sang was this;
      And his nose looked very grand
    As he sang it, with a bliss
      Which we could not understand;
    For his voice was very sad,
    While his nose was proud and glad.

    _Rain, April, rain, thy sunny, sunny tears!
    Through the black boughs the robe of Spring appears,
    Yet, for the ghosts of all the bygone years,
                  Rain, April, rain._

    _Rain, April, rain; the rose will soon be glad;
    Spring will rejoice, a Spring I, too, have had;
    A little while, till I no more be sad,
                  Rain, April, rain._

    And then the spider sprang
      Before we could breathe or speak,
    And one great scream out-rang
      As the terrible horny beak
    Crunched into the Sad Man's head,
      And the terrible hairy claws
    Clutched him around his middle;
      And he opened his lantern-jaws,
    And he gave one twist, one twiddle,
      One kick, and his sorrow was dead.

    And there, as he sucked his bleeding prey,
      The spider leered at us--"You will do,
    My sweet little dears, for another day;
      But this is the sort I like; huh! huh!"

    And there we stood, in frozen fear,
                  Whiter than death,
                  With bated breath;
    And lo! as we thought of Peterkin,
    Father and home and Peterkin,
    Once more that music clear and thin,
    Clear as a skylark's mounting song,
    But nearer now, more sweet, more strong,
    Drew all our wandering thoughts along,
    Until it seemed, a mystic sea
    Of hidden delight and harmony
    Began to ripple and rise all round
    The prison where our hearts lay bound;
    And from sweet heaven's most rosy rim
    There swelled a distant marching hymn
    Which made the hideous Hermit pause
    And listen with lank down-dropt jaws,
    Till, with great bulging eyes of fear,
    He sought the wicket again to peer
    Along the tunnel, as like sweet rain
    We heard the still approaching strain,
    And, under it, the rhythmic beat
    Of multitudinous marching feet.
    Nearer, nearer, they rippled and rang,
    And this was the marching song they sang:--


SONG

    _A fairy band are we
      In fairy-land:
    Singing march we, hand in hand;
      Singing, singing all day long:
      (Some folk never heard a fairy-song!)_

    _Singing, singing,
    When the merry thrush is swinging
      On a springing spray;
    Or when the witch that lives in gloomy caves
    And creeps by night among the graves
      Calls a cloud across the day;
    Cease we never our fairy song,
    March we ever, along, along,
    Down the dale, or up the hill,
    Singing, singing still._

    And suddenly the Hermit turned and ran with all his might
      Through the back-door of his parlour as we thought of little Peterkin;
    And the great grey roof was shattered by a shower of rosy light,
    And the spider-house went floating, torn and tattered through the night
      In a flight of prismy streamers, as a shout went up for Peterkin;
    And lo, the glistening fairy-host stood there arrayed for fight,
      In arms of rose and green and gold, to lead us on to Peterkin.

    And all around us, rippling like a pearl and opal sea,
      The host of fairy faces winked a kindly hint of Peterkin;
    And all around the rosy glade a laugh of fairy glee
    Watched spider-streamers floating up from fragrant tree to tree
      Till the moonlight caught the gossamers and, oh we wished for Peterkin!
    Each rope became a rainbow; but it made us ache to see
      Such a fairy forest-pomp without explaining it to Peterkin.

    Then all the glittering crowd
    With a courtly gesture bowed
    Like a rosy jewelled cloud
      Round a flame,
    As the King of Fairy-land,
    Very dignified and grand,
    Stepped forward to demand
      Whence we came.

    He'd a cloak of gold and green
    Such as caterpillars spin,
    For the fairy ways, I ween,
      Are very frugal;
    He'd a bow that he had borne
    Since the crimson Eden morn,
    And a honeysuckle horn
      For his bugle.

    So we told our tale of faëry to the King of Fairy-land,
      And asked if he could let us know the latest news of Peterkin;
    And he turned him with a courtly smile and waved his jewelled wand
    And cried, _Pease-blossom, Mustard-seed! You know the old command;
      Well; these are little children; you must lead them on to Peterkin._
    Then he knelt, the King of Faëry knelt; his eyes were great and grand
      As he took our hands and kissed them, saying, _Father loves your
        Peterkin!_

    So out they sprang, on either side,
    A light fantastic fairy guide,
    To lead us to the land unknown
    Where little Peterkin was gone;
    And, as we went with timid pace,
    We saw that every fairy face
    In all that moonlit host was wet
    With tears: we never shall forget
    The mystic hush that seemed to fade
    Away like sound, as down the glade
    We passed beyond their zone of light.
    Then through the forest's purple night
    We trotted, at a pleasant speed,
    With gay Pease-blossom and Mustard-seed.


PART IV

PEASE-BLOSSOM AND MUSTARD-SEED

      Shyly we surveyed our guides
    As through the gloomy woods we went
    In the light that the straggling moonbeams lent:
      We envied them their easy strides!
    Pease-blossom in his crimson cap
      And delicate suit of rose-leaf green,
    His crimson sash and his jewelled dagger,
    Strutted along with an elegant swagger
    Which showed that he didn't care one rap
      For anything less than a Fairy Queen:
    His eyes were deep like the eyes of a poet,
      Although his crisp and curly hair
    Certainly didn't seem to show it!
      While Mustard-seed was a devil-may-care
    Epigrammatic and pungent fellow
    Clad in a splendid suit of yellow,
    With emerald stars on his glittering breast
      And eyes that shone with a diamond light:
    They made you feel sure it would always be best
      To tell him the truth: he was not perhaps _quite_
    So polite as Pease-blossom, but then who could be
    _Quite_ such a debonair fairy as he?

    We never could tell you one-half that we heard
    And saw on that journey. For instance, a bird
    Ten times as big as an elephant stood
    By the side of a nest like a great thick wood:
    The clouds in glimmering wreaths were spread
    Behind its vast and shadowy head
    Which rolled at us trembling below. (Its eyes
    Were like great black moons in those pearl-pale skies.)
    And we feared he might take us, perhaps, for a worm.

    But he ruffled his breast with the sound of a storm,
    And snuggled his head with a careless disdain
    Under his huge hunched wing again;
    And Mustard-seed said, as we stole thro' the dark,
    There was nothing to fear: it was only a Lark!

    And so he cheered the way along
      With many a neat little epigram,
      While dear Pease-blossom before him swam
    On a billow of lovely moonlit song,
    Telling us why they had left their home
    In Sherwood, and had hither come
    To dwell in this magical scented clime,
    This dim old Forest of sweet Wild Thyme,

    "Men toil," he said, "from morn till night
    With bleeding hands and blinded sight
    For gold, more gold! They have betrayed
    The trust that in their souls was laid;
    Their fairy birthright they have sold
    For little disks of mortal gold;
    And now they cannot even see
    The gold upon the greenwood tree,
    The wealth of coloured lights that pass
    In soft gradations through the grass,
    The riches of the love untold
    That wakes the day from grey to gold;
    And howsoe'er the moonlight weaves
    Magic webs among the leaves
    Englishmen care little now
    For elves beneath the hawthorn bough:
    Nor if Robin should return
    Dare they of an outlaw learn;
    For them the Smallest Flower is furled,
    Mute is the music of the world;
    And unbelief has driven away
    Beauty from the blossomed spray."

    Then Mustard-seed with diamond eyes
    Taught us to be laughter-wise,
    And he showed us how that Time
    Is much less powerful than a rhyme;
    And that Space is but a dream;
    "For look," he said, with eyes agleam,
    "Now you are become so small
    You think the Thyme a forest tall;
    But underneath your feet you see
    A world of wilder mystery
    Where, if you were smaller yet,
    You would just as soon forget
    This forest, which you'd leave above
    As you have left the home you love!
    For, since the Thyme you used to know
    Seems a forest here below,
    What if you should sink again
    And find there stretched a mighty plain
    Between each grass-blade and the next?
    You'd think till you were quite perplexed!
    Especially if all the flowers
    That lit the sweet Thyme-forest bowers
    Were in that wild transcendent change
    Turned to Temples, great and strange,
    With many a pillared portal high
    And domes that swelled against the sky!
    How foolish, then, you will agree,
    Are those who think that all must see
    The world alike, or those who scorn
    Another who, perchance, was born
    Where--in a different dream from theirs--
    What they call sins to him are prayers!

    "We cannot judge; we cannot know;
    All things mingle; all things flow;
    There's only one thing constant here--
    Love--that untranscended sphere:
    Love, that while all ages run
    Holds the wheeling worlds in one;
    Love that, as your sages tell,
    Soars to heaven and sinks to hell."

    Even as he spoke, we seemed to grow
    Smaller, the Thyme trees seemed to go
    Farther away from us: new dreams
    Flashed out on us with mystic gleams
    Of mighty Temple-domes: deep awe
    Held us all breathless as we saw
    A carven portal glimmering out
    Between new flowers that put to rout
    Our other fancies: in sweet fear
    We tiptoed past, and seemed to hear
    A sound of singing from within
    That told our souls of Peterkin:
    Our thoughts of _him_ were still the same
    Howe'er the shadows went and came,
    So, on we wandered, hand in hand,
    And all the world was fairy-land.

       *   *   *   *

    And as we went we seemed to hear
      Surging up from distant dells
    A solemn music, soft and clear
      As if a field of lily-bells
    Were tolling all together, sweet
      But sad and low and keeping time
    To multitudinous marching feet
    With a slow funereal beat
      And a deep harmonious chime
    That told us by its dark refrain
    The reason fairies suffered pain.


SONG

      Bear her along
      Keep ye your song
    Tender and sweet and low:
      Fairies must die!
      Ask ye not why
    Ye that have hurt her so.

    _Passing away--flower from the spray! Colour and light from the leaf!
    Soon, soon will the year shed its bloom on her bier, and the dust
        of its dreams on our grief._

      Men upon earth
      Bring us to birth
    Gently at even and morn!
      When as brother and brother
      They greet one another
    And smile--then a fairy is born!

      But at each cruel word
      Upon earth that is heard,
    Each deed of unkindness or hate,
      Some fairy must pass
      From the games in the grass
    And steal thro' the terrible Gate.

    _Passing away--flower from the spray! Colour and light from the leaf!
    Soon, soon will the year shed its bloom on her bier, and the
        dust of its dreams on our grief._

      If ye knew, if ye knew
      All the wrong that ye do
    By the thought that ye harbour alone,
      How the face of some fairy
      Grows wistful and weary
    And the heart in her cold as a stone!
      Ah, she was born
      Blithe as the morn
    Under an April sky,
      Born of the greeting
      Of two lovers meeting.
    They parted, and so she must die.

    _Passing away--flower from the spray! Colour and light from the leaf!
    Soon, soon will the year shed its bloom on her bier, and the dust of
        its dreams on our grief._

      Cradled in blisses,
      Yea, born of your kisses,
    Oh, ye lovers that met by the moon,
      She would not have cried
      In the darkness and died
    If ye had not forgotten so soon.

      Cruel mortals, they say,
      Live for ever and aye,
    And they pray in the dark on their knees.
      But the flowers that are fled
      And the loves that are dead,
    What heaven takes pity on these?

    _Bear her along--singing your song--tender and sweet and low!
    Fairies must die! Ask ye not why--ye that have hurt her so._

      Passing away--
      Flower from the spray!
    Colour and light from the leaf!
      Soon, soon will the year
      Shed its bloom on her bier
    And the dust of its dreams on our grief.

       *   *   *   *

    Then we came through a glittering crystal grot
      By a path like, a pale moonbeam,
    And a broad blue bridge of Forget-me-not
      Over a shimmering stream,
    To where, through the deep blue dusk, a gleam
      Rose like the soul of the setting sun;
    A sunset breaking through the earth,
      A crimson sea of the poppies of dream,
    Deep as the sleep that gave them birth
      In the night where all earthly dreams are done.

    And then, like a pearl-pale porch of the moon,
      Faint and sweet as a starlit shrine,
                Over the gloom
                Of the crimson bloom
      We saw the Gates of Ivory shine;
    And, lulled and lured by the lullaby tune
      Of the cradling airs that drowsily creep
    From blossom to blossom, and lazily croon
    Through the heart of the midnight's mystic noon,
      We came to the Gates of the City of Sleep.

    Faint and sweet as a lily's repose
      On the broad black breast of a midnight lake,
      The City delighted the cradling night:
    Like a straggling palace of cloud it rose;
      The towers were crowned with a crystal light
      Like the starry crown of a white snowflake
    As they pierced in a wild white pinnacled crowd,
    Through the dusky wreaths of enchanted cloud
      That swirled all round like a witch's hair.

    And we heard, as the sound of a great sea sighing,
      The sigh of the sleepless world of care;
    And we saw strange shadowy figures flying
    Up to the Ivory Gates and beating
      With pale hands, long and famished and thin;
    Like blinded birds we saw them dash
      Against the cruelly gleaming wall:
      We heard them wearily moan and call
    With sharp starved lips for ever entreating
      The pale doorkeeper to let them in.

    And still, as they beat, again and again,
      We saw on the moon-pale lintels a splash
    Of crimson blood like a poppy-stain
    Or a wild red rose from the gardens of pain
      That sigh all night like a ghostly sea
      From the City of Sleep to Gethsemane.

    And lo, as we neared the mighty crowd
    An old blind man came, crying aloud
    To greet us, as once the blind man cried
    In the Bible picture--you know we tried
    To paint that print, with its Eastern sun;
    But the reds and the yellows _would_ mix and run,
    And the blue of the sky made a horrible mess
    Right over the edge of the Lord's white dress.
    And the old blind man, just as though he had eyes,
    Came straight to meet us; and all the cries
    Of the crowd were hushed; and a strange sweet calm
    Stole through the air like a breath of the balm
    That was wafted abroad from the Forest of Thyme
    (For it rolled all round that curious clime
    With its magical clouds of perfumed trees.)
    And the blind man cried, "Our help is at hand,
    Oh, brothers, remember the old command,
    Remember the frankincense and myrrh,
    Make way, make way for those little ones there;
    Make way, make way, I have seen them afar
    Under a great white Eastern star;
    For I am the mad blind man who sees!"
    Then he whispered, softly--_Of such as these_;
    And through the hush of the cloven crowd
    We passed to the gates of the City, and there
    Our fairy heralds cried aloud--
    _Open your Gates; don't stand and stare;
    These are the Children for whom our King
    Made all the star-worlds dance in a ring!_

    And lo, like a sorrow that melts from the heart
    In tears, the slow gates melted apart;
    And into the City we passed like a dream;
    And then, in one splendid marching stream
    The whole of that host came following through.
    We were only children, just like you;
    Children, ah, but we felt so grand
    As we led them--although we could understand
    Nothing at all of the wonderful song
    That rose all round as we marched along.


SONG

    _You that have seen how the world and its glory
      Change and grow old like the love of a friend;
    You that have come to the end of the story,
      You that were tired ere you came to the end;
    You that are weary of laughter and sorrow,
      Pain and pleasure, labour and sin,
    Sick of the midnight and dreading the morrow,
      Ah, come in; come in._

    _You that are bearing the load of the ages;
      You that have loved overmuch and too late;
    You that confute all the saws of the sages;
      You that served only because you must wait,
    Knowing your work was a wasted endeavour;
      You that have lost and yet triumphed therein,
    Add loss to your losses and triumph for ever;
      Ah, come in; come in._

    And we knew as we went up that twisted street,
      With its violet shadows and pearl-pale walls,
    We were coming to Something strange and sweet,
      For the dim air echoed with elfin calls;
    And, far away, in the heart of the City,
      A murmur of laughter and revelry rose,--
    A sound that was faint as the smile of Pity,
      And sweet as a swan-song's golden close.

    And then, once more, as we marched along,
    There surged all round us that wonderful song;
    And it swung to the tramp of our marching feet
    But ah, it was tenderer now and so sweet
    That it made our eyes grow wet and blind,
    And the whole wide-world seem mother-kind,
    Folding us round with a gentle embrace,
    And pressing our souls to her soft sweet face.


SONG

    _Dreams; dreams; ah, the memory blinding us,
      Blinding our eyes to the way that we go;
    Till the new sorrow come, once more reminding us
      Blindly of kind hearts, ours long ago:
    Mother-mine, whisper we, yours was the love for me!
      Still, though our paths lie lone and apart,
    Yours is the true love, shining above for me,
      Yours are the kind eyes, hurting my heart._

    _Dreams; dreams; ah, how shall we sing of them,
      Dreams that we loved with our head on her breast:
    Dreams; dreams; and the cradle-sweet swing of them;
      Ay, for her voice was the sound we loved best:
    Can we remember at all or, forgetting it,
      Can we recall for a moment the gleam
    Of our childhood's delight and the wonder begetting it,
      Wonder awakened in dreams of a dream?_

    And once again, from the heart of the City
      A murmur of tenderer laughter rose,
    A sound that was faint as the smile of Pity,
      And sweet as a swan-song's golden close;
    And it seemed as if some wonderful Fair
      Were charming the night of the City of Dreams,
    For, over the mystical din out there,
      The clouds were litten with flickering gleams,
    And a roseate light like the day's first flush
      Quivered and beat on the towers above,
    And we heard through the curious crooning hush
      An elfin song that we used to love.
    _Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn ..._
      And the soft wind blew it the other way;
    So all that we heard was--_Cow's in the corn_;
      But we never heard anything half so gay!
    And ever we seemed to be drawing nearer
      That mystical roseate smoke-wreathed glare,
    And the curious music grew louder and clearer,
      Till mustard-seed said, "We are lucky, you see,
      We've arrived at a time of festivity!"
    And so to the end of the street we came,
      And turned a corner, and--there we were,
    In a place that glowed like the dawn of day,
      A crowded clamouring City square
    Like the cloudy heart of an opal, aflame
      With the lights of a great Dream-Fair:
    Thousands of children were gathered there,
      Thousands of old men, weary and grey,
    And the shouts of the showmen filled the air--
      This way! This way! This way!

    And _See-Saw_; _Margery Daw_; we heard a rollicking shout,
    As the swing-boats hurtled over our heads to the tune of the roundabout;
    And _Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn_, we heard the showmen cry,
    And _Dickory Dock, I'm as good as a clock_, we heard the swings reply.

    This way, this way to your Heart's Desire;
      Come, cast your burdens down;
    And the pauper shall mount his throne in the skies,
      And the king be rid of his crown:
    And souls that were dead shall be fed with fire
      From the fount of their ancient pain,
    And your lost love come with the light in her eyes
      Back to your heart again.

    Ah, here be sure she shall never prove
      Less kind than her eyes were bright;
    This way, this way to your old lost love,
      You shall kiss her lips to-night;
    This way for the smile of a dead man's face
      And the grip of a brother's hand,
    This way to your childhood's heart of grace
      And your home in Fairy-land.

    _Dickory Dock, I'm as good as a clock_, d'you hear my swivels chime?
    To and fro as I come and go, I keep eternal time.
    O, little Bo-peep, if you've lost your sheep and don't know where
        to find 'em,
    Leave 'em alone and they'll come home, and carry their tails behind 'em.

    And _See-Saw; Margery Daw_; there came the chorussing shout,
    As the swing-boats answered the roaring tune of the rollicking
        roundabout;
    Dickory, dickory, dickory, dock, d'you hear my swivels chime?
    Swing; swing; you're as good as a king if you keep eternal time.

    Then we saw that the tunes of the world were one;
    And the metre that guided the rhythmic sun
    Was at one, like the ebb and the flow of the sea,
    With the tunes that we learned at our mother's knee;
    The beat of the horse-hoofs that carried us down
    To see the fine Lady of Banbury Town;
    And so, by the rhymes that we knew, we could tell
    Without knowing the others--that all was well.

    And then, our brains began to spin;
    For it seemed as if that mighty din
    Were no less than the cries of the poets and sages
    Of all the nations in all the ages;
    And, if they could only beat out the whole
    Of their music together, the guerdon and goal
    Of the world would be reached with one mighty shout,
    And the dark dread secret of Time be out;
    And nearer, nearer they seemed to climb,
      And madder and merrier rose the song,
    And the swings and the see-saws marked the time;
      For this was the maddest and merriest throng
    That ever was met on a holy-day
    To dance the dust of the world away;
    And madder and merrier, round and round
    The whirligigs whirled to the whirling sound,
    Till it seemed that the mad song burst its bars
    And mixed with the song of the whirling stars,
    The song that the rhythmic Time-Tides tell
    To seraphs in Heaven and devils in Hell;
    Ay; Heaven and Hell in accordant chime
    With the universal rhythm and rhyme
    Were nearing the secret of Space and Time;
    The song of that ultimate mystery
    Which only the mad blind men who see,
    Led by the laugh of a little child,
    Can utter; ay, wilder and yet more wild
    It maddened, till now--full song--it was out!
    It roared from the starry roundabout--

    _A child was born in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem,
      A child was born in Bethlehem; ah, hear my fairy fable;
    For I have seen the King of Kings, no longer thronged with angel wings,
      But crooning like a little babe, and cradled in a stable._

    _The wise men came to greet him with their gifts of myrrh
        and frankincense,--
      Gold and myrrh and frankincense they brought to make him mirth;
    And would you know the way to win to little brother Peterkin,
      My childhood's heart shall guide you through the glories of
        the earth._

    _A child was born in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem, in Bethlehem;
      The wise men came to welcome him: a star stood o'er the gable;
    And there they saw the King of Kings, no longer thronged with
        angel wings,
      But crooning like a little babe, and cradled in a stable._

    And creeping through the music once again the fairy cry
      Came freezing o'er the snowy towers to lead us on to Peterkin:
    Once more the fairy bugles blew from lands beyond the sky,
    And we all groped out together, dazed and blind, we knew not why;
      Out through the City's farther gates we went to look for Peterkin;
    Out, out into the dark Unknown, and heard the clamour die
      Far, far away behind us as we trotted on to Peterkin.

    Then once more along the rare
      Forest-paths we groped our way:
    Here the glow-worm's league-long glare
      Turned the Wild Thyme night to day:
    There we passed a sort of whale
      Sixty feet in length or more,
    But we knew it was a snail
      Even when we heard it snore.

    Often through the glamorous gloom
      Almost on the top of us
    We beheld a beetle loom
      Like a hippopotamus;
    Once or twice a spotted toad
      Like a mountain wobbled by
    With a rolling moon that glowed
      Through the skin-fringe of its eye.

    Once a caterpillar bowed
      Down a leaf of Ygdrasil
    Like a sunset-coloured cloud
      Sleeping on a quiet hill:
    Once we came upon a moth
      Fast asleep with outspread wings,
    Like a mighty tissued cloth
      Woven for the feet of kings.

    There above the woods in state
      Many a temple dome that glows
    Delicately like a great
      Rainbow-coloured bubble rose:
    Though they were but flowers on earth,
      Oh, we dared not enter in;
    For in that divine re-birth
      Less than awe were more than sin.

    Yet their mystic anthems came
      Sweetly to our listening ears;
    And their burden was the same--
      "No more sorrow, no more tears!
    Whither Peterkin has gone
      You, assuredly, shall go:
    When your wanderings are done,
      All he knows you, too, shall know!"

    So we thought we'd onward roam
      Till earth's Smallest Flower appeared,
    With a less tremendous dome
      Less divinely to be feared:
    Then, perchance, if we should dare
      Timidly to enter in,
    Might some kindly doorkeeper
      Give us news of Peterkin.

    At last we saw a crimson porch
    Far away, like a dull red torch
    Burning in the purple gloom;
    And a great ocean of perfume
    Rolled round us as we drew anear,
    And then we strangely seemed to hear
    The shadow of a mighty psalm,
      A sound as if a golden sea
    Of music swung in utter calm
      Against the shores of Eternity;
    And then we saw the mighty dome
      Of some mysterious Temple tower
    On high; and knew that we had come,
      At last, to that sweet House of Grace
      Which wise men find in every place--
      The Temple of the Smallest Flower.

    And there--alas--our fairy friends
    Whispered, "Here our kingdom ends:
      You must enter in alone,
    But your souls will surely show
      Whither Peterkin is gone
    And the road that you must go:
      We, poor fairies, have no souls!
      Hark, the warning hare-bell tolls;"
    So "Good-bye, good-bye," they said,
    "Dear little seekers-for-the-dead."
    They vanished; ah, but as they went
    We heard their voices softly blent
    In some mysterious fairy song
    That seemed to make us wise and strong;

    For it was like the holy calm
    That fills the bosomed rose with balm,
    Or blessings that the twilight breathes
    Where the honeysuckle wreathes
    Between young lovers and the sky
    As on banks of flowers they lie;
    And with wings of rose and green
    Laughing fairies pass unseen,
    Singing their sweet lullaby,--
        Lulla-lulla-lullaby!
        Lulla-lulla-lullaby!
          Ah, good-night, with lullaby!

       *   *   *   *

    Only a flower? Those carven walls,
    Those cornices and coronals,
    The splendid crimson porch, the thin
    Strange sounds of singing from within--
    Through the scented arch we stept,
      Pushed back the soft petallic door,
    And down the velvet aisles we crept;
      Was it a Flower--no more?

    For one of the voices that we heard,
    A child's voice, clear as the voice of a bird,
    Was it not?--nay, it could not be!
    And a woman's voice that tenderly
    Answered him in fond refrain,
    And pierced our hearts with sweet sweet pain,
    As if dear Mary-mother hung
    Above some little child, and sung.
    Between the waves of that golden sea
    The cradle-songs of Eternity;
    And, while in her deep smile he basked,
    Answered whatsoe'er he asked.

    _What is there hid in the heart of a rose,
          Mother-mine?
    Ah, who knows, who knows, who knows?
    A man that died on a lonely hill
    May tell you, perhaps, but none other will,
          Little child._

    _What does it take to make a rose,
          Mother-mine?
    The God that died to make it knows
    It takes the world's eternal wars,
    It takes the moon and all the stars,
    It takes the might of heaven and hell
    And the everlasting Love as well,
          Little child._

    But there, in one great shrine apart
    Within the Temple's holiest heart,
    We came upon a blinding light,
      Suddenly, and a burning throne
    Of pinnacled glory, wild and white;
      We could not see Who reigned thereon;
    For, all at once, as a wood-bird sings,
    The aisles were full of great white wings
    Row above mystic burning row;
    And through the splendour and the glow
    We saw four angels, great and sweet,
    With outspread wings and folded feet,
    Come gliding down from a heaven within
      The golden heart of Paradise;
      And in their hands, with laughing eyes,
    Lay little brother Peterkin.

    And all around the Temple of the Smallest of the Flowers
      The glory of the angels made a star for little Peterkin;
    For all the Kings of Splendour and all the Heavenly Powers
    Were gathered there together in the fairy forest bowers
      With all their globed and radiant wings to make a star for Peterkin,
    The star that shone upon the East, a star that still is ours,
      Whene'er we hang our stockings up, a star of wings for Peterkin.

    Then all, in one great flash, was gone--
      A voice cried, "Hush, all's well!"
    And we stood dreaming there alone,
      In darkness. Who can tell
    The mystic quiet that we felt,
    As if the woods in worship knelt;
      Far off we heard a bell
    Tolling strange human folk to prayer
    Through fields of sunset-coloured air.

    And then a voice, "Why, here they are!"
      And--as it seemed--we woke;
    The sweet old skies, great star by star
      Upon our vision broke;
    Field over field of heavenly blue
    Rose o'er us; then a voice we knew
      Softly and gently spoke--
    "See, they are sleeping by the side
    Of that dear little one--who died."


PART V

THE HAPPY ENDING

    We told dear father all our tale
      That night before we went to bed,
    And at the end his face grew pale,
      And he bent over us and said
    (Was it not strange?) he, too, was there,
      A weary, weary watch to keep
      Before the gates of the City of Sleep;
    But, ere we came, he did not dare
      Even to dream of entering in,
      Or even to hope for Peterkin.
    He was the poor blind man, he said,
    And we--how low he bent his head!
    Then he called mother near; and low
    He whispered to us--"Prompt me now;
    For I forget that song we heard,
    But you remember every word."
    Then memory came like a breaking morn,
    And we breathed it to him--_A child was born!_
    And there he drew us to his breast
    And softly murmured all the rest.--

    _The wise men came to greet him with their gifts of myrrh
        and frankincense,--
      Gold and myrrh and frankincense they brought to make him mirth;
    And would you know the way to win to little brother Peterkin,
      My childhood's heart shall guide you through the glories of
        the earth._

    Then he looked up and mother knelt
      Beside us, oh, her eyes were bright;
    Her arms were like a lovely belt
      All round us as we said Good-night
    To father: _he_ was crying now,
    But they were happy tears, somehow;
    For there we saw dear mother lay
    Her cheek against his cheek and say--
    Hush, let me kiss those tears away.


_DEDICATION_

    _What can a wanderer bring
      To little ones loved like you?
    You have songs of your own to sing
      That are far more steadfast and true,
    Crumbs of pity for birds
      That flit o'er your sun-swept lawn,
    Songs that are dearer than all our words
      With a love that is clear as the dawn._

    _What should a dreamer devise,
      In the depths of his wayward will,
    To deepen the gleam of your eyes
      Who can dance with the Sun-child still?
    Yet you glanced on his lonely way,
      You cheered him in dream and deed,
    And his heart is o'erflowing, o'erflowing to-day
      With a love that--you never will need._

    _What can a pilgrim teach
      To dwellers in fairy-land?
    Truth that excels all speech
      You murmur and understand!
    All he can sing you he brings;
      But--one thing more if he may,
    One thing more that the King of Kings
      Will take from the child on the way._

    _Yet how can a child of the night
      Brighten the light of the sun?
    How can he add a delight
      To the dances that never are done?
    Ah, what if he struggles to turn
      Once more to the sweet old skies
    With praise and praise, from the fetters that burn,
      To the God that brightened your eyes?_

    _Yes; he is weak, he will fail,
      Yet, what if, in sorrows apart,
    One thing, one should avail,
      The cry of a grateful heart;
    It has wings: they return through the night
      To a sky where the light lives yet,
    To the clouds that kneel on his mountain-height
      And the path that his feet forget._

    _What if he struggles and still
      Fails and struggles again?
    What if his broken will
      Whispers the struggle is vain?
    Once at least he has risen
      Because he remembered your eyes;
    Once they have brought to his earthly prison
      The passion of Paradise._

    _Kind little eyes that I love,
      Eyes forgetful of mine,
    In a dream I am bending above
      Your sleep, and you open and shine;
    And I know as my own grow blind
      With a lonely prayer for your sake,
    He will hear--even me--little eyes that were kind,
      God bless you, asleep or awake._




FORTY SINGING SEAMEN AND OTHER POEMS

_TO GARNETT_




FORTY SINGING SEAMEN

"In our lands be Beeres and Lyons of dyvers colours as ye redd, grene,
black, and white. And in our land be also unicornes and these Unicornes
slee many Lyons.... Also there dare no man make a lye in our lande, for
if he dyde he sholde incontynent be sleyn."--_Mediæval Epistle, of Pope
Prester John._


    I

    Across the seas of Wonderland to Mogadore we plodded,
      Forty singing seamen in an old black barque,
    And we landed in the twilight where a Polyphemus nodded
      With his battered moon-eye winking red and yellow through the dark!
            For his eye was growing mellow,
            Rich and ripe and red and yellow,
      As was time, since old Ulysses made him bellow in the dark!
    _Cho._--Since Ulysses bunged his eye up with a pine-torch in the dark!


    II

    _Were_ they mountains in the gloaming or the giant's ugly shoulders
      Just beneath the rolling eyeball, with its bleared and vinous glow,
    Red and yellow o'er the purple of the pines among the boulders
      And the shaggy horror brooding on the sullen slopes below,
            _Were_ they pines among the boulders
            Or the hair upon his shoulders?
      We were only simple seamen, so of course we didn't know.
    _Cho._--We were simple singing seamen, so of course we couldn't know.


    III

    But we crossed a plain of poppies, and we came upon a fountain
      Not of water, but of jewels, like a spray of leaping fire;
    And behind it, in an emerald glade, beneath a golden mountain
      There stood a crystal palace, for a sailor to admire;
            For a troop of ghosts came round us,
            Which with leaves of bay they crowned us,
      Then with grog they well nigh drowned us, to the depth of our desire!
    _Cho._--And 'twas very friendly of them, as a sailor can admire!


    IV

    There was music all about us, we were growing quite forgetful
      We were only singing seamen from the dirt of London-town,
    Though the nectar that we swallowed seemed to vanish half regretful
      As if we wasn't good enough to take such vittles down,
            When we saw a sudden figure,
            Tall and black as any nigger,
      Like the devil--only bigger--drawing near us with a frown!
    _Cho._--Like the devil--but much bigger--and he wore a golden crown!


    V

    And "What's all this?" he growls at us! With dignity we chaunted,
      "Forty singing seamen, sir, as won't be put upon!"
    "What? Englishmen?" he cries, "Well, if ye don't mind being haunted,
      Faith you're welcome to my palace; I'm the famous Prester John!
            Will ye walk into my palace?
            I don't bear 'ee any malice!
      One and all ye shall be welcome in the halls of Prester John!"
    _Cho._--So we walked into the palace and the halls of Prester John!


    VI

    Now the door was one great diamond and the hall a hollow ruby--
      Big as Beachy Head, my lads, nay bigger by a half!
    And I sees the mate wi' mouth agape, a-staring like a booby,
      And the skipper close behind him, with his tongue out like a calf!
            Now the way to take it rightly
            Was to walk along politely
      Just as if you didn't notice--so I couldn't help but laugh!
    _Cho._--For they both forgot their manners and the crew was bound
        to laugh!


    VII

    But he took us through his palace and, my lads, as I'm a sinner,
      We walked into an opal like a sunset-coloured cloud--
    "My dining-room," he says, and, quick as light we saw a dinner
      Spread before us by the fingers of a hidden fairy crowd;
            And the skipper, swaying gently
            After dinner, murmurs faintly,
      "I looks to-wards you, Prester John, you've done us very proud!"
    _Cho._--And we drank his health with honours, for he _done_ us
        _very_ proud!


    VIII

    Then he walks us to his garden where we sees a feathered demon
      Very splendid and important on a sort of spicy tree!
    "That's the Phoenix," whispers Prester, "which all eddicated seamen
      Knows the only one existent, and _he's_ waiting for to flee!
            When his hundred years expire
            Then he'll set hisself a-fire
      And another from his ashes rise most beautiful to see!"
    _Cho._--With wings of rose and emerald most beautiful to see!


    IX

    Then he says, "In younder forest there's a little silver river,
      And whosoever drinks of it, his youth shall never die!
    The centuries go by, but Prester John endures for ever
      With his music in the mountains and his magic on the sky!
            While _your_ hearts are growing colder,
            While your world is growing older,
      There's a magic in the distance, where the sea-line meets the sky,"
    _Cho._--It shall call to singing seamen till the fount o' song is dry!


    X

    So we thought we'd up and seek it, but that forest fair defied us,--
      First a crimson leopard laughs at us most horrible to see,
    Then a sea-green lion came and sniffed and licked his chops and eyed us,
      While a red and yellow unicorn was dancing round a tree!
            _We_ was trying to look thinner,
            Which was hard, because our dinner
      Must ha' made us very tempting to a cat o' high degree!
    _Cho._--Must ha' made us very tempting to the whole menarjeree!


    XI

    So we scuttled from that forest and across the poppy meadows
      Where the awful shaggy horror brooded o'er us in the dark!
    And we pushes out from shore again a-jumping at our shadows,
      And pulls away most joyful to the old black barque!
            And home again we plodded
            While the Polyphemus nodded
      With his battered moon-eye winking red and yellow through the dark.
    _Cho._--Oh, the moon above the mountains, red and yellow through
        the dark!


    XII

    Across the seas of Wonderland to London-town we blundered,
      Forty singing seamen as was puzzled for to know
    If the visions that we saw was caused by--here again we pondered--
      A tipple in a vision forty thousand years ago.
            Could the grog we _dreamt_ we swallowed
            Make us _dream_ of all that followed?
      We were only simple seamen, so of course we didn't know!
    _Cho._--We were simple singing seamen, so of course we could not know!




THE EMPIRE BUILDERS


    Who are the Empire-builders? They
      Whose desperate arrogance demands
    A self-reflecting power to sway
      A hundred little selfless lands?
    Lord God of battles, ere we bow
      To these and to their soulless lust,
    Let fall Thy thunders on us now
      And strike us equal to the dust.

    Before the stars in heaven were made
      Our great Commander led us forth;
    And now the embattled lines are laid
      To East, to West, to South, to North;
    According as of old He planned
      We take our station in the field,
    Nor dare to dream we understand
      The splendour of the swords we wield.

    We know not what the Soul intends
      That lives and moves behind our deeds;
    We wheel and march to glorious ends
      Beyond the common soldier's needs:
    And some are raised to high rewards,
      And some by regiments are hurled
    To die upon the opposing swords
      And sleep--forgotten by the world.

    And not where navies churn the foam,
      Nor called to fields of fierce emprize,
    In many a country cottage-home
      The Empire-builder lives and dies:
    Or through the roaring streets he goes
      A lean and weary City slave,
    The conqueror of a thousand foes
      Who walks, unheeded, to his grave.

    Leaders unknown of hopes forlorn
      Go past us in the daily mart,
    With many a shadowy crown of thorn
      And many a kingly broken heart:
    Though England's banner overhead
      Ever the secret signal flew,
    We only see its Cross is red
      As children see the skies are blue.

    For all are Empire-builders here,
      Whose hearts are true to heaven and home
    And, year by slow revolving year,
      Fulfil the duties as they come;
    So simple seems the task, and yet
      Many for this are crucified;
    Ay, and their brother-men forget
      The simple wounds in palm and side.

    But he that to his home is true,
      Where'er the tides of power may flow,
    Has built a kingdom great and new
      Which Time nor Fate shall overthrow
    These are the Empire-builders, these
      Annex where none shall say them nay
    Beyond the world's uncharted seas
      Realms that can never pass away.




NELSON'S YEAR

(1905)


    I

              "Hasten the Kingdom, England!"
              This year, a hundred years ago,
    The world attended, breathless, on the gathering pomp of war,
      While England and her deathless dead, with all their mighty
        hearts aglow,
    Swept onward like the dawn of doom to triumph at Trafalgar;
            Then the world was hushed to wonder
            As the cannon's dying thunder
    Broke out again in muffled peals across the heaving sea,
            And home the Victor came at last,
            Home, home, with England's flag half-mast,
    That never dipped to foe before, on Nelson's Victory.


    II

            God gave this year to England;
              And what He gives He takes again;
    He gives us life, He gives us death: our victories have wings;
      He gives us love and in its heart He hides the whole world's heart
        of pain:
    We gain by loss: impartially the eternal balance swings!
            Ay; in the fire we cherish
            Our thoughts and dreams may perish;
    Yet shall it burn for England's sake triumphant as of old!
            What sacrifice could gain for her
            Our own shall still maintain for her,
    And hold the gates of Freedom wide that take no keys of gold.


    III

            God gave this year to England;
              Her eyes are far too bright for tears
    Of sorrow; by her silent dead she kneels, too proud for pride;
      Their blood, their love, have bought her right to claim the new
        imperial years
    In England's name for Freedom, in whose love her children died;
            In whose love, though hope may dwindle,
            Love and brotherhood shall kindle
    Between the striving nations as a choral song takes fire,
          Till new hope, new faith, new wonder
            Cleave the clouds of doubt asunder,
    And speed the union of mankind in one divine desire.


    IV

            Hasten the Kingdom, England;
              This year across the listening world
    There came a sound of mingled tears where victory and defeat
      Clasped hands; and Peace--among the dead--stood wistfully, with white
        wings furled,
    Knowing the strife was idle; for the night and morning meet,
            Yet there is no disunion
            In heaven's divine communion
    As through the gates of twilight the harmonious morning pours;
            Ah, God speed that grander morrow
            When the world's divinest sorrow
    Shall show how Love stands knocking at the world's unopened doors.


    V

            Hasten the Kingdom, England;
              Look up across the narrow seas,
    Across the great white nations to thy dark imperial throne
      Where now three hundred million souls attend on thine august decrees;
    Ah, bow thine head in humbleness, the Kingdom is thine own:
            Not for the pride or power
            God gave thee this in dower;
    But, now the West and East have met and wept their mortal loss,
            Now that their tears have spoken
            And the long dumb spell is broken,
    Is it nothing that thy banner bears the red eternal cross?


    VI

            Ay! Lift the flag of England;
              And lo, that Eastern cross is there,
    Veiled with a hundred meanings as our English eyes are veiled;
      Yet to the grander dawn we move oblivious of the sign we bear,
    Oblivious of the heights we climb until the last be scaled;
            Then with all the earth before us
            And the great cross floating o'er us
    We shall break the sword we forged of old, so weak we were and blind;
            While the inviolate heaven discloses
            England's Rose of all the roses
    Dawning wide and ever wider o'er the kingdom of mankind.


    VII

          Hasten the Kingdom, England;
            For then all nations shall be one;
    One as the ordered stars are one that sing upon their way,
      One with the rhythmic glories of the swinging sea and the rolling sun,
    One with the flow of life and death, the tides of night and day;
            One with all dreams of beauty,
            One with all laws of duty;
    One with the weak and helpless while the one sky burns above;
            Till eyes by tears made glorious
            Look up at last victorious,
    And lips that starved break open in one song of life and love.


    VIII

          Hasten the Kingdom, England;
            And when the Spring returns again
    Rekindle in our English hearts the universal Spring,
      That we may wait in faith upon the former and the latter rain,
    Till all waste places burgeon and the wildernesses sing;
            Pour the glory of thy pity
            Through the dark and troubled city;
    Pour the splendour of thy beauty over wood and meadow fair;
            May the God of battles guide thee
            And the Christ-child walk beside thee
    With a word of peace for England in the dawn of Nelson's Year.




IN TIME OF WAR


    I

    To-night o'er Bagshot heath the purple heather
      Rolls like dumb thunder to the splendid West;
    And mighty ragged clouds are massed together
      Above the scarred old common's broken breast;
    And there are hints of blood between the boulders,
      Red glints of fiercer blossom, bright and bold;
    And round the shaggy mounds and sullen shoulders
      The gorse repays the sun with savage gold.

    And now, as in the West the light grows holy,
      And all the hollows of the heath grow dim,
    Far off, a sulky rumble rolls up slowly
      Where guns at practice growl their evening hymn.

    And here and there in bare clean yellow spaces
      The print of horse-hoofs like an answering cry
    Strikes strangely on the sense from lonely places
      Where there is nought but empty heath and sky.

    The print of warlike hoofs, where now no figure
      Of horse or man along the sky's red rim
    Breaks on the low horizon's rough black rigour
      To make the gorgeous waste less wild and grim;

    Strangely the hoof-prints strike, a Crusoe's wonder,
      Framed with sharp furze amongst the footless fells,
    A menace and a mystery, rapt asunder,
      As if the whole wide world contained nought else,--

    Nought but the grand despair of desolation
      Between us and that wild, how far, how near,
    Where, clothed with thunder, nation grapples nation,
      And Slaughter grips the clay-cold hand of Fear.


    II

    And far above the purple heath the sunset stars awaken,
      And ghostly hosts of cloud across the West begin to stream,
    And all the low soft winds with muffled cannonades are shaken,
      And all the blood-red blossom draws aloof into a dream;
    A dream--no more--and round the dream the clouds are curled together;
      A dream of two great stormy hosts embattled in the sky;
    For there against the low red heavens each sombre ridge of heather
      Up-heaves a hedge of bayonets around a battle-cry;

    Melts in the distant battle-field or brings the dream so near it
      That, almost, as the rifted clouds around them swim and reel,
    A thousand grey-lipped faces flash--ah, hark, the heart can hear it--
      The sharp command that lifts as one the levelled lines of steel.

    And through the purple thunders there are silent shadows creeping
      With murderous gleams of light, and then--a mighty leaping roar
    Where foe and foe are met; and then--a long low sound of weeping
      As Death laughs out from sea to sea, another fight is o'er.

    Another fight--but ah, how much is over? Night descending
      Draws o'er the scene her ghastly moon-shot veil with piteous hands;
    But all around the bivouac-glare the shadowy pickets wending
      See sights, hear sounds that only war's own madness understands.

    No circle of the accursed dead where dreaming Dante wandered,
      No city of death's eternal dole could match this mortal world
    Where men, before the living soul and quivering flesh are sundered,
      Through all the bestial shapes of pain to one wide grave are hurled.

    But in the midst for those who dare beyond the fringe to enter
      Be sure one kingly figure lies with pale and blood-soiled face,
    And round his brows a ragged crown of thorns; and in the centre
      Of those pale folded hands and feet the sigil of his grace.

    See, how the pale limbs, marred and scarred in love's lost battle,
        languish;
      See how the splendid passion still smiles quietly from his eyes:
    Come, come and see a king indeed, who triumphs in his anguish,
      Who conquers here in utter loss beneath the eternal skies.

    For unto lips so deadly calm what answer shall be given?
      Oh pale, pale king so deadly still beneath the unshaken stars,
    Who shall deny thy kingdom here, though heaven and earth were riven,
      With the last roar of onset in the world's intestine wars?

    The laugh is Death's; he laughs as erst o'er hours that England
        cherished,
      "Count up, count up the stricken homes that wail the first-born son,
    Count by your starved and fatherless the tale of what hath perished;
      Then gather with your foes and ask if you--or I--have won."


    III

    The world rolls on; and love and peace are mated:
      Still on the breast of England, like a star,
    The blood-red lonely heath blows, consecrated,
      A brooding practice-ground for blood-red war.

    Yet is there nothing out of tune with Nature
      There, where the skylark showers his earliest song,
    Where sun and wind have moulded every feature,
      And one world-music bears each note along.

    There many a brown-winged kestrel swoops or hovers
      In poised and patient quest of his own prey;
    And there are fern-clad glens where happy lovers
      May kiss the murmuring summer noon away.

    There, as the primal earth was--all is glorious
      Perfect and wise and wonderful in view
    Of that great heaven through which we rise victorious
      O'er all that strife and change and death can do.

    No nation yet has risen o'er earth's first nature;
      Though love illumed each individual mind,
    Like some half-blind, half-formed primeval creature
      The State still crawled a thousand years behind.

    Still on the standards of the great World-Powers
      Lion and bear and eagle sullenly brood,
    Whether the slow folds flap o'er halcyon hours
      Or stream tempestuously o'er fields of blood.

    By war's red evolution we have risen
      Far, since fierce Erda chose her conquering few,
    And out of Death's red gates and Time's grey prison
      They burst, elect from battle, tried and true.

    But now Death mocks at youth and love and glory,
      Chivalry slinks behind his loaded mines,
    With meaner murderous lips War tells her story,
      And round her cunning brows no laurel shines.

    And here to us the eternal charge is given
      To rise and make our low world touch God's high:
    To hasten God's own kingdom, Man's own heaven,
      And teach Love's grander army how to die.

    No kingdom then, no long-continuing city
      Shall e'er again be stablished by the sword;
    No blood-bought throne defy the powers of pity,
      No despot's crown outweigh one helot's word.

    Imperial England, breathe thy marching orders:
      The great host waits; the end, the end is close,
    When earth shall know thy peace in all her borders,
      And all her deserts blossom with thy Rose.

    Princedoms and peoples rise and flash and perish
      As the dew passes from the flowering thorn;
    Yet the one Kingdom that our dreams still cherish
      Lives in a light that blinds the world's red morn.

    Hasten the Kingdom, England, the days darken;
      We would not have thee slacken watch or ward,
    Nor doff thine armour till the whole world hearken,
      Nor till Time bid thee lay aside the sword.

    Hasten the Kingdom; hamlet, heath, and city,
      We are all at war, one bleeding bulk of pain;
    Little we know; but one thing--by God's pity--
      We know, and know all else on earth is vain.

    We know not yet how much we dare, how little;
      We dare not dream of peace; yet, as at need,
    England, God help thee, let no jot or tittle
      Of Love's last law go past thee without heed.

    _Who saves his life shall lose it!_ The great ages
      Bear witness--Rome and Babylon and Tyre
    Cry from the dust-stopped lips of all their sages,--
      There is no hope if man can climb no higher.

    England, by God's grace set apart to ponder
      A little while from battle, ah, take heed,
    Keep watch, keep watch, beside thy sleeping thunder;
      Call down Christ's pity while those others bleed;

    Waken the God within thee, while the sorrow
      Of battle surges round a distant shore,
    While Time is thine, lest on some deadly morrow
      The moving finger write--_but thine no more_.

    Little we know--but though the advancing æons
      Win every painful step by blood and fire,
    Though tortured mouths must chant the world's great pæans,
      And martyred souls proclaim the world's desire;

    Though war be nature's engine of rejection,
      Soon, soon, across her universal verge
    The soul of man in sacred insurrection
      Shall into God's diviner light emerge.

    Hasten the Kingdom, England, queen and mother;
      Little we know of all Time's works and ways;
    Yet this, this, this is sure: we need none other
      Knowledge or wisdom, hope or aim or praise,

    But to keep this one stormy banner flying
      In this one faith that none shall e'er disprove,
    Then drive the embattled world before thee, crying,
      There is one Emperor, whose name is Love.




ODE FOR THE SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY OF SWINBURNE


    I

    He needs no crown of ours, whose golden heart
      Poured out its wealth so freely in pure praise
      Of others: him the imperishable bays
    Crown, and on Sunium's height he sits apart:
    He hears immortal greetings this great morn:
      Fain would we bring, we also, all we may,
        Some wayside flower of transitory bloom,
            Frail tribute, only born
      To greet the gladness of this April day
        Then waste on death's dark wind its faint perfume.


    II

    Here on this April day the whole sweet Spring
      Speaks thro' his music only, or seems to speak.
      And we that hear, with hearts uplift and weak,
    What can we more than claim him for our king?
    Here on this April day (and many a time
      Shall April come and find him singing still)
        He is one with the world's great heart beyond the years,
          One with the pulsing rhyme
      Of tides that work some heavenly rhythmic will
        And hold the secret of all human tears.


    III

    For he, the last of that immortal race
      Whose music, like a robe of living light
      Re-clothed each new-born age and made it bright
    As with the glory of Love's transfiguring face,
    Reddened earth's roses, kindled the deep blue
      Of England's radiant, ever-singing sea,
        Recalled the white Thalassian from the foam.
          Woke the dim stars anew
      And triumphed in the triumph of Liberty,
        We claim him; but he hath not here his home.


    IV

    Not here; round him to-day the clouds divide:
      We know what faces thro' that rose-flushed air
      Now bend above him: Shelley's face is there,
    And Hugo's, lit with more than kingly pride.
    Replenished there with splendour, the blind eyes
      Of Milton bend from heaven to meet his own,
        Sappho is there, crowned with those queenlier flowers
          Whose graft outgrew our skies,
      His gift: Shakespeare leans earthward from his throne
        With hands outstretched. He needs no crown of ours.




IN CLOAK OF GREY


    I

    Love's a pilgrim, cloaked in grey,
      And his feet are pierced and bleeding:
    Have ye seen him pass this way
      Sorrowfully pleading?
    Ye that weep the world away,
    Have ye seen King Love to-day?--


    II

    Yea, we saw him; but he came
      Poppy-crowned and white of limb!
    Song had touched his lips with flame,
      And his eyes were drowsed and dim;
    And we kissed the hours away
    Till night grew rosier than the day.--


    III

    Hath he left you?--Yea, he left us
      A little while ago,
    Of his laughter quite bereft us
      And his limbs of snow;
    We know not why he went away
    Who ruled our revels yesterday.--


    IV

    Because ye did not understand
      Love cometh from afar,
    A pilgrim out of Holy Land
      Guided by a star:
    Last night he came in cloak of grey,
    Begging. Ye knew him not: he went his way.




A RIDE FOR THE QUEEN


    Queen of queens, oh lady mine,
      You who say you love me,
    Here's a cup of crimson wine
      To the stars above me;
    Here's a cup of blood and gall
      For a soldier's quaffing!
    What's the prize to crown it all?
      Death? I'll take it laughing!
    I ride for the Queen to-night!

    Though I find no knightly fee
      Waiting on my lealty,
    High upon the gallows-tree
      Faithful to my fealty,
    What had I but love and youth,
      Hope and fame in season?
    She has proved that more than truth
      Glorifies her treason!

    Would that other do as much?
      Ah, but if in sorrow
    Some forgotten look or touch
      Pierce her heart to-morrow
    She might love me yet, I think;
      So her lie befriends me,
    Though I know there's darker drink
      Down the road she sends me.

    Ay, one more great chance is mine
      (Can I faint or falter?)
    She shall pour my blood like wine,
      Make my heart her altar,
    Burn it to the dust! For, there,
      What if o'er the embers
    She should stoop and--I should hear--
      "_Hush! Thy love remembers!_"

    One more chance for every word
      Whispered to betray me,
    While she buckled on my sword
      Smiling to allay me;
    One more chance; ah, let me not
      Mar her perfect pleasure;
    Love shall pay me, jot by jot,
      Measure for her measure.

    Faith shall think I never knew,
      I will be so fervent!
    Doubt shall dream I dreamed her true
      As her war-worn servant!
    Whoso flouts her spotless name
      (Love, I wear thy token!)
    He shall face one sword of flame
      Ere the lie be spoken!

    All the world's a-foam with may,
      (Fragrant as her bosom!)
    Could I find a sweeter way
      Through the year's young blossom,
    Where her warm red mouth on mine
      Woke my soul's desire?...
    Hey! The cup of crimson wine,
      Blood and gall and fire!

    Castle Doom or Gates of Death?
      (Smile again for pity!)
    "Boot and horse," my lady saith,
      "Spur against the City,
    Bear this message!" God and she
      Still forget the guerdon;
    Nay, the rope is on the tree!
      That shall bear the burden!
    I ride for the Queen to-night!




SONG


    I

    When that I loved a maiden
      My heaven was in her eyes,
    And when they bent above me
      I knew no deeper skies;
    But when her heart forsook me
      My spirit broke its bars,
    For grief beyond the sunset
      And love beyond the stars.


    II

    When that I loved a maiden
      She seemed the world to me:
    Now is my soul the universe,
      My dreams the sky and sea:
    There is no heaven above me,
      No glory binds or bars
    My grief beyond the sunset,
      My love beyond the stars.


    III

    When that I loved a maiden
      I worshipped where she trod;
    But, when she clove my heart, the cleft
      Set free the imprisoned god:
    Then was I king of all the world,
      My soul had burst its bars,
    For grief beyond the sunset
      And love beyond the stars.




THE HIGHWAYMAN




PART ONE


    I

    The wind was a torrent of darkness among the gusty trees,
    The moon was a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas,
    The road was a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor,
    And the highwayman came riding--
                Riding--riding--
    The highwayman came riding, up to the old inn-door.


    II

    He'd a French cocked-hat on his forehead, a bunch of lace at his chin,
    A coat of the claret velvet, and breeches of brown doe-skin;
    They fitted with never a wrinkle: his boots were up to the thigh!
    And he rode with a jewelled twinkle,
                His pistol butts a-twinkle,
    His rapier hilt a-twinkle, under the jewelled sky.


    III

    Over the cobbles he clattered and clashed in the dark inn-yard,
    And he tapped with his whip on the shutters, but all was locked
        and barred;
    He whistled a tune to the window, and who should be waiting there
    But the landlord's black-eyed daughter,
                Bess, the landlord's daughter,
    Plaiting a dark red love-knot into her long black hair.


    IV

    And dark in the dark old inn-yard a stable-wicket creaked
    Where Tim the ostler listened; his face was white and peaked;
    His eyes were hollows of madness, his hair like mouldy hay,
    But he loved the landlord's daughter,
                The landlord's red-lipped daughter,
    Dumb as a dog he listened, and he heard the robber say--


    V

    "One kiss, my bonny sweetheart, I'm after a prize to-night,
    But I shall be back with the yellow gold before the morning light;
    Yet, if they press me sharply, and harry me through the day,
    Then look for me by moonlight,
                Watch for me by moonlight,
    I'll come to thee by moonlight, though hell should bar the way."


    VI

    He rose upright in the stirrups; he scarce could reach her hand,
    But she loosened her hair i' the casement! His face burnt like a brand
    As the black cascade of perfume came tumbling over his breast;
    And he kissed its waves in the moonlight,
                (Oh, sweet black waves in the moonlight!)
    Then he tugged at his rein in the moonlight, and galloped away
        to the West.


PART TWO


    I

    He did not come in the dawning; he did not come at noon;
    And out o' the tawny sunset, before the rise o' the moon,
    When the road was a gipsy's ribbon, looping the purple moor,
    A red-coat troop came marching--
                Marching--marching--
    King George's men came marching, up to the old inn-door.


    II

    They said no word to the landlord, they drank his ale instead,
    But they gagged his daughter and bound her to the foot of her
        narrow bed;
    Two of them knelt at her casement, with muskets at their side!
    There was death at every window;
                And hell at one dark window;
    For Bess could see, through her casement, the road that _he_
        would ride.


    III

    They had tied her up to attention, with many a sniggering jest;
    They had bound a musket beside her, with the barrel beneath her breast!
    "Now keep good watch!" and they kissed her.
                She heard the dead man say--
    _Look for me by moonlight;
                Watch for me by moonlight;
    I'll come to thee by moonlight, though hell should bar the way!_


    IV

    She twisted her hands behind her; but all the knots held good!
    She writhed her hands till her fingers were wet with sweat or blood!
    They stretched and strained in the darkness, and the hours
        crawled by like years,
    Till, now, on the stroke of midnight,
                Cold, on the stroke of midnight,
    The tip of one finger touched it! The trigger at least was hers!


    V

    The tip of one finger touched it; she strove no more for the rest!
    Up, she stood up to attention, with the barrel beneath her breast,
    She would not risk their hearing; she would not strive again;
    For the road lay bare in the moonlight;
                Blank and bare in the moonlight;
    And the blood of her veins in the moonlight throbbed to her
        love's refrain.


    VI

    _Tlot-tlot; tlot-tlot!_ Had they heard it? The horse-hoofs ringing
        clear;
    _Tlot-tlot, tlot-tlot_, in the distance? Were they deaf that they did
        not hear?
    Down the ribbon of moonlight, over the brow of the hill,
    The highwayman came riding,
                Riding, riding!
    The red-coats looked to their priming! She stood up, straight and
        still!


    VII

    _Tlot-tlot_, in the frosty silence! _Tlot-tlot_, in the echoing night!
    Nearer he came and nearer! Her face was like a light!
    Her eyes grew wide for a moment; she drew one last deep breath,
    Then her finger moved in the moonlight,
                Her musket shattered the moonlight,
    Shattered her breast in the moonlight and warned him--with her death.


    VIII

    He turned; he spurred to the West; he did not know who stood
    Bowed, with her head o'er the musket, drenched with her own red blood!
    Not till the dawn he heard it, his face grew grey to hear
    How Bess, the landlord's daughter,
                The landlord's black-eyed daughter,
    Had watched for her love in the moonlight, and died in the darkness
        there.


    IX

    Back, he spurred like a madman, shrieking a curse to the sky,
    With the white road smoking behind him and his rapier brandished high!
    Blood-red were his spurs i' the golden noon; wine-red was his velvet
        coat,
    When they shot him down on the highway,
                Down like a dog on the highway,
    And he lay in his blood on the highway, with the bunch of lace at his
        throat.

       *   *   *   *


    X

    _And still of a winter's night, they say, when the wind is in the trees,
    When the moon is a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas,
    When the road is a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor,
    A highwayman comes riding--
                Riding--riding--
    A highwayman comes riding, up to the old inn-door._


    XI

    _Over the cobbles he clatters and clangs in the dark inn-yard;
    He taps with his whip on the shutters, but all is locked and barred;
    He whistles a tune to the window, and who should be waiting there
    But the landlord's black-eyed daughter,
                Bess, the landlord's daughter,
    Plaiting a dark red love-knot into her long black hair._




THE HAUNTED PALACE


    Come to the haunted palace of my dreams,
      My crumbling palace by the eternal sea,
    Which, like a childless mother, still must croon
    Her ancient sorrows to the cold white moon,
            Or, ebbing tremulously,
    With one pale arm, where the long foam-fringe gleams,
      Will gather her rustling garments, for a space
      Of muffled weeping, round her dim white face.

    A princess dwelt here once: long, long ago
      This tower rose in the sunset like a prayer;
    And, through the witchery of that casement, rolled
    In one soft cataract of faëry gold
            Her wonder-woven hair;
    Her face leaned out and took the sacred glow
      Of evening, like the star that listened, high
      Above the gold clouds of the western sky.

    Was there no prince behind her in the gloom,
      No crimson shadow of his rich array?
    Her face leaned down to me: I saw the tears
    Bleed through her eyes with the slow pain of years,
            And her mouth yearned to say--
    "Friend, is there any message, from the tomb
      Where love lies buried?" But she only said--
      "Oh, friend, canst thou not save me from my dead?

    "Canst thou not minister to a soul in pain?
      Or hast thou then no comfortable word?
    Is there no faith in thee wherewith to atone
    For his unfaith who left me here alone,
            Heart-sick with hope deferred;
    Oh, since my love will never come again,
      Bring'st thou no respite through the desolate years,
    Respite from these most unavailing tears?"

    Then saw I, and mine own tears made response,
      Her woman's heart come breaking through her eyes;
    And, as I stood beneath the tower's grey wall,
    She let the soft waves of her deep hair fall
            Like flowers from Paradise
    Over my fevered face: then all at once
      Pity was passion; and like a sea of bliss
      Those waves rolled o'er me drowning for her kiss.

       *   *   *   *

    Seven years we dwelt together in that tower,
      Seven years in that old palace by the sea,
    And sitting at that casement, side by side,
    She told me all her pain: how love had died
            Now for all else but me;
    Yet how she had loved that other: like a flower
      Her red lips parted and with low sweet moan
      She pressed their tender suffering on mine own.

    And always with vague eyes she gazed afar,
      Out through the casement o'er the changing tide;
    And slowly was my heart's hope brought to nought
    That some day I should win each wandering thought
            And make her my soul's bride:
    Still, still she gazed across the cold sea-bar;
      Ay; with her hand in mine, still, still and pale,
      Waited and watched for the unreturning sail.

    And I, too, watched and waited as the years
      Rolled on; and slowly was I brought to feel
    How on my lips she met her lover's kiss,
    How my heart's pulse begat an alien bliss;
            And cold and hard as steel
    For me those eyes were, though their tender tears
      Were salt upon my cheek; and then one night
      I saw a sail come through the pale moonlight.

    And like an alien ghost I stole away,
      And like a breathing lover he returned;
    And in the woods I dwelt, or sometimes crept
    Out in the grey dawn while the lovers slept
            And the great sea-tides yearned
    Against the iron shores; and faint and grey
      The tower and the shut casement rose above:
      And on the earth I sobbed out all my love.

    At last, one royal rose-hung night in June,
      When the warm air like purple Hippocrene
    Brimmed the dim valley and sparkled into stars,
    I saw them cross the foam-lit sandy bars
            And dark pools, glimmering green,
    To bathe beneath the honey-coloured moon:
      I saw them swim out from that summer shore,
      Kissed by the sea, but they returned no more.

       *   *   *   *

    And into the dark palace, like a dream
      Remembered after long oblivious years,
    Through the strange open doors I crept and saw
    As some poor pagan might, with reverent awe,
            And deep adoring tears,
    The moonlight through that painted window stream
      Over the soft wave of their vacant bed;
      There sank I on my knees and bowed my head,

    For as a father by a cradle bows,
      Remembering two dead children of his own,
    I knelt; and by the cry of the great deep
    Their love seemed like a murmuring in their sleep,
            A little fevered moan,
    A little tossing of childish arms that shows
      How dreams go by! "If I were God," I wept,
      "I would have pity on children while they slept."

       *   *   *   *

    The days, the months, the years drift over me;
      This is my habitation till I die:
    Nothing is changed; they left that open book
    Beside the window. Did he sit and look
            Up at her face as I
    Looked while she read it, and the enchanted sea
      With rich eternities of love unknown
      Fulfilled the low sweet music of her tone?

    So did he listen, looking in her face?
      And did she ever pause, remembering so
      The heart that bore the whole weight of her pain
    Until her own heart's love returned again?
            In the still evening glow
    I sit and listen in this quiet place,
      And only hear--like notes of phantom birds--
      Their perished kisses and little broken words.

    _Come to the haunted palace of my dreams,
      My crumbling palace by the eternal sea,
    Which, like a childless mother, still must croon
    Her ancient sorrows to the cold white moon,
            Or, ebbing tremulously,
    With one pale arm, where the long foam-fringe gleams,
      Will gather her rustling garments, for a space
      Of muffled weeping, round her dim white face._




THE SCULPTOR


    This is my statue: cold and white
    It stands and takes the morning light!
      The world may flout my hopes and fears,
      Yet was my life's work washed with tears
    Of blood when this poor hand last night
      Finished the pain of years.

    Speak for me, patient lips of stone,
    Blind eyes my lips have rested on
      So often when the o'er-weary brain
      Would grope to human love again,
    And found this grave cold mask alone
      And the tears fell like rain.

    Ay; is this all? Is this the brow
    I fondled, never wondering how
      It lived--the face of pain and bliss
      That through the marble met my kiss?
    Oh, though the whole world praise it now,
      Let no man dream it is!

    They blame; they cannot blame aright
    Who never knew what infinite
      Deep loss must shame me most of all!
      They praise; like earth their praises fall
    Into a tomb. The hour of light
      Is flown beyond recall.

    Yet have I seen, yet have I known,
    And oh, not tombed in cold white stone
    The dream I lose on earth below;
    And I shall come with face aglow
    And find and claim it for my own
    Before God's throne, I know.




SUMMER

(AN ODE)


    Now like a pageant of the Golden Year
      In rich memorial pomp the hours go by,
    With rose-embroidered flags unfurled
    And tasselled bugles calling through the world
        Wake, for your hope draws near!
    Wake, for in each soft porch of azure sky,
      Seen through each arch of pale green leaves, the Gate
      Of Eden swings apart for Summer's royal state.

    Ah, when the Spirit of the moving scene
      Has entered in, the splendour will be spent!
    The flutes will cease, the gates will close;
    Only the scattered crimson of the rose,
        The wild wood's hapless queen,
    Dis-kingdomed, will declare the way he went;
      And, in a little while, her court will go,
      Pass like a cloud and leave no trace on earth below.

    Tell us no more of Autumn, the slow gold
      Of fruitage ripening in a world's decay,
    The falling leaves, the moist rich breath
    Of woods that swoon and crumble into death
        Over the gorgeous mould:
      Give us the flash and scent of keen-edged May
      Where wastes that bear no harvest yield their bloom,
      Rude crofts of flowering nettle, bents of yellow broom.

    The very reeds and sedges of the fen
      Open their hearts and blossom to the sky;
    The wild thyme on the mountain's knees
    Unrolls its purple market to the bees;
        Unharvested of men
    The Traveller's Joy can only smile and die.
      Joy, joy alone the throbbing whitethroats bring,
      Joy to themselves and heaven! They were but born to sing!

    And see, between the northern-scented pines,
      The whole sweet summer sharpens to a glow!
    See, as the well-spring plashes cool
    Over a shadowy green fern-fretted pool
        The mystic sunbeam shines
    For one mad moment on a breast of snow
      A warm white shoulder and a glowing arm
      Up-flung, where some swift Undine sinks in shy alarm.

    And if she were not all a dream, and lent
      Life for a little to your own desire,
    Oh, lover in the hawthorn lane,
    Dream not you hold her, or you dream in vain!
        The violet, spray-besprent
    When from that plunge the rainbows flashed like fire,
      Will scarce more swiftly lose its happy dew
      Than eyes which Undine haunts will cease to shine on you.

    What though the throstle pour his heart away,
      A happy spendthrift of uncounted gold,
    Swinging upon a blossomed briar
    With soft throat lifted in a wild desire
        To make the world his may.
    Ever the pageant through the gates is rolled
      Further away; in vain the rich notes throng
      Flooding the mellow noon with wave on wave of song.

    The feathery meadows like a lilac sea,
      Knee-deep, with honeyed clover, red and white,
    Roll billowing: the crisp clouds pass
    Trailing their soft blue shadows o'er the grass;
        The skylark, mad with glee,
    Quivers, up, up, to lose himself in light;
      And, through the forest, like a fairy dream
      Through some dark mind, the ferns in branching beauty stream.

    Enough of joy! A little respite lend,
      Summer, fair god that hast so little heed
    Of these that serve thee but to die,
    Mere trappings of thy tragic pageantry!
        Show us the end, the end!
    We too, with human hearts that break and bleed,
      March to the night that rounds their fleeting hour,
      And feel we, too, perchance but serve some loftier Power.

    O that our hearts might pass away with thee,
      Burning and pierced and full of thy sweet pain,
    Burst through the gates with thy swift soul,
    Hunt thy most white perfection to the goal,
        Nor wait, once more to see
    Thy chaliced lilies rotting in the rain,
      Thy ragged yellowing banners idly hung
      In woods that have forgotten all the songs we sung!

    _Peace! Like a pageant of the Golden Year
      In rich memorial pomp the hours go by,
    With rose-embroidered flags unfurled
    And tasselled bugles calling through the world
        Wake, for your hope draws near!
    Wake, for in each soft porch of azure sky,
      Seen through each arch of pale green leaves, the Gate
      Of Eden swings apart for Summer's royal state._

    Not wait! Forgive, forgive that feeble cry
      Of blinded passion all unworthy thee!
    For here the spirit of man may claim
    A loftier vision and a nobler aim
        Than e'er was born to die:
    Man only, of earth, throned on Eternity,
      From his own sure abiding-place can mark
      How earth's great golden dreams go past into the dark.




AT DAWN


    O Hesper-Phosphor, far away
        Shining, the first, the last white star,
    Hear'st thou the strange, the ghostly cry,
    That moan of an ancient agony
    From purple forest to golden sky
        Shivering over the breathless bay?
    It is not the wind that wakes with the day;
        For see, the gulls that wheel and call,
        Beyond the tumbling white-topped bar,
    Catching the sun-dawn on their wings,
        Like snow-flakes or like rose-leaves fall,
    Flutter and fall in airy rings;
        And drift, like lilies ruffling into blossom
        Upon some golden lake's unwrinkled bosom.

    Are not the forest's deep-lashed fringes wet
    With tears? Is not the voice of all regret
        Breaking out of the dark earth's heart?
    She too, she too, has loved and lost; and we--
    We that remember our lost Aready,
    Have we not known, we too,
    The primal greenwood's arch of blue,
    The radiant clouds at sun-rise curled
    Around the brows of the golden world;
    The marble temples, washed with dew,
    To which with rosy limbs aflame
    The violet-eyed Thalassian came,
    Came, pitiless, only to display
    How soon the youthful splendour dies away;
        Came, only to depart
    Laughing across the grey-grown bitter sea;
    For each man's life is earth's epitome,
    And though the years bring more than aught they take,
    Yet might his heart and hers well break
    Remembering how one prayer must still be vain.
        How one fair hope is dead,
        One passion quenched, one glory fled
    With those first loves that never come again.

    How many years, how many generations,
        Have heard that sigh in the dawn,
    When the dark earth yearns to the unforgotten nations
        And the old loves withdrawn,
    Old loves, old lovers, wonderful and unnumbered
        As waves on the wine-dark sea,
    'Neath the tall white towers of Troy and the temples that slumbered
        In Thessaly?

    From the beautiful palaces, from the miraculous portals,
        The swift white feet are flown!
    They were taintless of dust, the proud, the peerless Immortals
        As they sped to their loftier throne!
    Perchance they are there, earth dreams, on the shores of Hesper,
        Her rosy-bosomed Hours,
    Listening the wild fresh forest's enchanted whisper,
        Crowned with its new strange flowers;
    Listening the great new ocean's triumphant thunder
        On the stainless unknown shore,
    While that perilous queen of the world's delight and wonder
        Comes white from the foam once more.

    When the mists divide with the dawn o'er those glittering waters,
        Do they gaze over unoared seas--
    Naiad and nymph and the woodland's rose-crowned daughters
        And the Oceanides?
    Do they sing together, perchance, in that diamond splendour,
        That world of dawn and dew,
    With eyelids twitching to tears and with eyes grown tender
        The sweet old songs they knew,
    The songs of Greece? Ah, with harp-strings mute do they falter
        As the earth like a small star pales?
    When the heroes launch their ship by the smoking altar
        Does a memory lure their sails?
    Far, far away, do their hearts resume the story
      That never on earth was told,
    When all those urgent oars on the waste of glory
      Cast up its gold?

    _Are not the forest fringes wet
    With tears? Is not the voice of all regret
    Breaking out of the dark earth's heart?
    She too, she too, has loved and lost; and though
    She turned last night in disdain
        Away from the sunset-embers,
    From her soul she can never depart;
    She can never depart from her pain.
    Vainly she strives to forget;
    Beautiful in her woe,
        She awakes in the dawn and remembers._




THE SWIMMER'S RACE


    I

    Between the clover and the trembling sea
      They stand upon the golden-shadowed shore
    In naked boyish beauty, a strenuous three,
      Hearing the breakers' deep Olympic roar;
    Three young athletes poised on a forward limb,
      Mirrored like marble in the smooth wet sand,
        Three statues moulded by Praxiteles:
          The blue horizon rim
      Recedes, recedes upon a lovelier land,
        And England melts into the skies of Greece.


    II

    The dome of heaven is like one drop of dew,
      Quivering and clear and cloudless but for one
    Crisp bouldered Alpine range that blinds the blue
      With snowy gorges glittering to the sun:
    Forward the runners lean, with outstretched hand
      Waiting the word--ah, how the light relieves
        The silken rippling muscles as they start
          Spurning the yellow sand,
      Then skimming lightlier till the goal receives
        The winner, head thrown back and lips apart.


    III

    Now at the sea-marge on the sand they lie
      At rest for a moment, panting as they breathe,
    And gazing upward at the unbounded sky
      While the sand nestles round them from beneath;
    And in their hands they gather up the gold
      And through their fingers let it lazily stream
        Over them, dusking all their limbs' fair white,
            Blotting their shape and mould,
      Till, mixed into the distant gazer's dream
        Of earth and heaven, they seem to sink from sight.


    IV

    But one, in seeming petulance, oppressed
      With heat has cast his brown young body free:
    With arms behind his head and heaving breast
      He lies and gazes at the cool bright sea;
    So young Leander might when in the noon
      He panted for the starry eyes of eve
        And whispered o'er the waste of wandering waves,
            "Hero, bid night come soon!"
      Nor knew the nymphs were waiting to receive
        And kiss his pale limbs in their cold sea-caves.


    V

    Now to their feet they leap and, with a shout,
      Plunge through the glittering breakers without fear,
    Breast the green-arching billows, and still out,
      As if each dreamed the arms of Hero near;
    Now like three sunbeams on an emerald crest,
      Now like three foam-flakes melting out of sight,
        They are blent with all the glory of all the sea;
            One with the golden West;
      Merged in a myriad waves of mystic light
        As life is lost in immortality.




THE VENUS OF MILO


    I

    Backward she leans, as when the rose unblown
      Slides white from its warm sheath some morn in May!
    Under the sloping waist, aslant, her zone
      Clings as it slips in tender disarray;
    One knee, out-thrust a little, keeps it so
      Lingering ere it fall; her lovely face
          Gazes as o'er her own Eternity!
    Those armless radiant shoulders, long ago
      Perchance held arms out wide with yearning grace
        For Adon by the blue Sicilian sea.


    II

    No; thou eternal fount of these poor gleams,
      Bright axle-star of the wheeling temporal skies,
    Daughter of blood and foam and deathless dreams,
      Mother of flying Love that never dies,
    To thee, the topmost and consummate flower,
      The last harmonic height, our dull desires
        And our tired souls in dreary discord climb;
    The flesh forgets its pale and wandering fires;
      We gaze through heaven as from an ivory tower
        Shining upon the last dark shores of Time.


    III

    White culmination of the dreams of earth,
      Thy splendour beacons to a loftier goal,
    Where, slipping earthward from the great new birth,
      The shadowy senses leave the essential soul!
    Oh, naked loveliness, not yet revealed,
      A moment hence that falling robe will show
        No prophecy like this, this great new dawn,
    The bare bright breasts, each like a soft white shield,
      And the firm body like a slope of snow
        Out of the slipping dream-stuff half withdrawn.




THE NET OF VULCAN


    From peaks that clove the heavens asunder
      The hunchback god with sooty claws
    Loomed o'er the night, a cloud of thunder,
      And hurled the net of mortal laws;
    It flew, and all the world grew dimmer;
      Its blackness blotted out the stars,
    Then fell across the rosy glimmer
      That told where Venus couched with Mars.

    And, when the steeds that draw the morning
      Spurned from their Orient hooves the spray,
    All vainly soared the lavrock, warning
      Those tangled lovers of the day:
    Still with those twin white waves in blossom,
      Against the warrior's rock-broad breast,
    The netted light of the foam-born bosom
      Breathed like a sea at rest.

    And light was all that followed after,
      Light the derision of the sky,
    Light the divine Olympian laughter
      Of kindlier gods in days gone by:
    Low to her lover whispered Venus,
      "The shameless net be praised for this--
    When night herself no more could screen us
      It snared us one more hour of bliss."




NIOBE


    How like the sky she bends above her child,
      One with the great horizon of her pain!
    No sob from our low seas where woe runs wild,
      No weeping cloud, no momentary rain,
    Can mar the heaven-high visage of her grief,
      That frozen anguish, proud, majestic, dumb.
        She stoops in pity above the labouring earth,
            Knowing how fond, how brief
    Is all its hope, past, present, and to come,
      She stoops in pity, and yearns to assuage its dearth.

    Through that fair face the whole dark universe
      Speaks, as a thorn-tree speaks thro' one white flower;
    And all those wrenched Promethean souls that curse
      The gods, but cannot die before their hour,
    Find utterance in her beauty. That fair head
      Bows over all earth's graves. It was her cry
        Men heard in Rama when the twisted ways
            With children's blood ran red!
      Her silence utters all the sea would sigh;
          And, in her face, the whole earth's anguish prays.

    It is the pity, the pity of human love
      That strains her face, upturned to meet the doom,
    And her deep bosom, like a snow-white dove
      Frozen upon its nest, ne'er to resume
    Its happy breathing o'er the golden brace
      Whose fostering was her death. Death, death alone
        Can break the anguished horror of that spell!
            The sorrow on her face
      Is sealed: the living flesh is turned to stone;
        She knows all, all, that Life and Time can tell.

    Ah, yet, her woman's love, so vast, so tender;
      Her woman's body, hurt by every dart;
    Braving the thunder, still, still hide the slender
      Soft frightened child beneath her mighty heart.
    She is all one mute immortal cry, one brief
      Infinite pang of such victorious pain
        That she transcends the heavens and bows them down!
            The majesty of grief
      Is hers, and her dominion must remain
        Eternal. God nor man usurps that crown.




ORPHEUS AND EURYDICE


    I

    Height over height, the purple pine-woods clung to the rich Arcadian
        mountains,
      Holy-sweet as a sea of incense, under the low dark crimson skies:
    Glad were the glens where Eurydice bathed, in the beauty of dawn, at the
        haunted fountains
      Deep in the blue hyacinthine hollows, whence all the rivers of
          Arcady rise.

    Long ago, ah, white as the Huntress, cold and sweet as the petals that
        crowned her,
      Fair and fleet as the fawn that shakes the dew from the fern at
          break of day,
    Wreathed with the clouds of her dusky hair that swept in a sun-bright
        glory around her,
      Down to the valley her light feet stole, ah, soft as the budding of
          flowers in May.

    Down to the valley she came, for far and far below in the
        dreaming meadows
      Pleaded ever the Voice of voices, calling his love by her
        golden name;
    So she arose from her home in the hills, and down through the blossoms
        that danced with their shadows,
      Out of the blue of the dreaming distance, down to the heart of her
        lover she came.

       *   *   *   *

    Red were the lips that hovered above her lips in the flowery haze of the
        June-day:
      Red as a rose through the perfumed mist of passion that reeled before
          her eyes;
    Strong the smooth young sunburnt arms that folded her heart to his heart
        in the noon-day,
      Strong and supple with throbbing sunshine under the blinding
          southern skies.

    Ah, the kisses, the little murmurs, mad with pain for their
        phantom fleetness,
      Mad with pain for the passing of love that lives, they
          dreamed--as we dream--for an hour!
    Ah, the sudden tempest of passion, mad with pain, for its
        over-sweetness,
      As petal by petal and pang by pang their love broke out into
          perfect flower.

    Ah, the wonder as once he wakened, out of a dream of remembered blisses,
      Couched in the meadows of dreaming blossom to feel, like the touch of
          a flower on his eyes,
    Cool and fresh with the fragment dews of dawn the touch of her light
        swift kisses,
      Shed from the shadowy rose of her face between his face and the warm
          blue skies.


    II

    Lost in his new desire
    He dreamed away the hours;
          His lyre
    Lay buried in the flowers:

    To whom the King of Heaven,
    Apollo, lord of light,
          Had given
    Beauty and love and might:

    Might, if he would, to slay
    All evil dreams and pierce
          The grey
    Veil of the Universe;

    With Love that holds in one
    Sacred and ancient bond
          The sun
    And all the vast beyond,

    And Beauty to enthrall
    The soul of man to heaven:
          Yea, all
    These gifts to him were given.

    _Yet in his dream's desire
    He drowsed away the hours:
          His lyre
    Lay buried in the flowers._

    Then in his wrath arose
    Apollo, lord of light,
          That shows
    The wrong deed from the right;

    And by what radiant laws
    O'erruling human needs,
          The cause
    To consequence proceeds;

    How balanced is the sway
    He gives each mortal doom:
          How day
    Demands the atoning gloom:

    How all good things await
    The soul that pays the price
          To Fate
    By equal sacrifice;

    And how on him that sleeps
    For less than labour's sake
          There creeps
    Uncharmed, the Pythian snake.


    III

    Lulled by the wash of the feathery grasses, a sea with many a sun-swept
        billow,
      Heart to heart in the heart of the summer, lover by lover asleep
          they lay,
    Hearing only the whirring cicala that chirruped awhile at their
          poppied pillow
      Faint and sweet as the murmur of men that laboured in villages far
        away.

    Was not the menace indeed more silent? Ah, what care for labour and
        sorrow?
      Gods in the meadows of moly and amaranth surely might envy their deep
          sweet bed
    Here where the butterflies troubled the lilies of peace, and took no
        thought for the morrow,
      And golden-girdled bees made feast as over the lotus the soft sun
          spread.

    Nearer, nearer the menace glided, out of the gorgeous gloom around
        them,
      Out of the poppy-haunted shadows deep in the heart of the purple
          brake;
    Till through the hush and the heat as they lay, and their own sweet
        listless dreams enwound them,--
      Mailed and mottled with hues of the grape-bloom suddenly, quietly,
          glided the snake.

    Subtle as jealousy, supple as falsehood, diamond-headed and cruel as
        pleasure,
      Coil by coil he lengthened and glided, straight to the fragrant curve
          of her throat:
    There in the print of the last of the kisses that still glowed red from
        the sweet long pressure,
      Fierce as famine and swift as lightning over the glittering lyre he
          smote.


    IV

    And over the cold white body of love and delight
      Orpheus arose in the terrible storm of his grief,
    With quivering up-clutched hands, deadly and white,
      And his whole soul wavered and shook like a wind-swept leaf:

    As a leaf that beats on a mountain, his spirit in vain
      Assaulted his doom and beat on the Gates of Death:
    Then prone with his arms o'er the lyre he sobbed out his pain,
      And the tense chords faintly gave voice to the pulse of his breath.

    And he heard it and rose, once again, with the lyre in his hand,
      And smote out the cry that his white-lipped sorrow denied:
    And the grief's mad ecstasy swept o'er the summer-sweet land,
      And gathered the tears of all Time in the rush of its tide.

    There was never a love forsaken or faith forsworn,
      There was never a cry for the living or moan for the slain,
    But was voiced in that great consummation of song; ay, and borne
      To storm on the Gates of the land whence none cometh again.

    Transcending the barriers of earth, comprehending them all
      He followed the soul of his loss with the night in his eyes;
    And the portals lay bare to him there; and he heard the faint call
      Of his love o'er the rabble that wails by the river of sighs.

    Yea, there in the mountains before him, he knew it of old,
      That portal enormous of gloom, he had seen it in dreams,
    When the secrets of Time and of Fate through his harmonies rolled;
      And behind it he heard the dead moan by their desolate streams.

    And he passed through the Gates with the light and the cloud of his
        song,
      Dry-shod over Lethe he passed to the chasms of hell;
    And the hosts of the dead made mock at him, crying, _How long
      Have we dwelt in the darkness, oh fool, and shall evermore dwell?_

    _Did our lovers not love us?_ the grey skulls hissed in his face;
      _Were our lips not red? Were these cavernous eyes not bright?
    Yet us, whom the soft flesh clothed with such roseate grace,
      Our lovers would loathe if we ever returned to their sight!_

    Oh then, through the soul of the Singer, a pity so vast
      Mixed with his anguish that, smiting anew on his lyre,
    He caught up the sorrows of hell in his utterance at last,
      Comprehending the need of them all in his own great desire.


    V

    And they that were dead, in his radiant music, remembered the
        dawn with its low deep crimson,
      Heard the murmur of doves in the pine-wood, heard the moan of the
        roaming sea,
    Heard and remembered the little kisses, in woods where the last of
        the moon yet swims on
      Fragrant, flower-strewn April nights of young-eyed lovers in Arcady;

    Saw the soft blue veils of shadow floating over the billowy grasses
      Under the crisp white curling clouds that sailed and trailed through
          the melting blue;
    Heard once more the quarrel of lovers above them pass, as a
        lark-song passes,
      Light and bright, till it vanished away in an eye-bright heaven of
          silvery dew.

    Out of the dark, ah, white as the Huntress, cold and sweet as the
        petals that crowned her,
      Fair and fleet as a fawn that shakes the dew from the fern at break
          of day;
    Wreathed with the clouds of her dusky hair that swept in a sun-bright
        glory around her,
      On through the deserts of hell she came, and the brown air bloomed
          with the light of May.

    On through the deserts of hell she came; for over the fierce and frozen
        meadows
      Pleaded ever the Voice of voices, calling his love by her golden name;
    So she arose from her grave in the darkness, and up through the wailing
        fires and shadows,
      On by chasm and cliff and cavern, out of the horrors of death she
          came.

    Then had she followed him, then had he won her, striking a chord that
        should echo for ever,
      Had he been steadfast only a little, nor paused in the great
          transcendent song;
    But ere they had won to the glory of day, he came to the brink of the
        flaming river
      And ceased, to look on his love a moment, a little moment, and
          overlong.


    VI

    O'er Phlegethon he stood:
    Below him roared and flamed
          The flood
    For utmost anguish named.

    And lo, across the night,
    The shining form he knew
          With light
    Swift footsteps upward drew.

    Up through the desolate lands
    She stole, a ghostly star,
          With hands
    Outstretched to him afar.

    With arms outstretched, she came
    In yearning majesty,
          The same
    Royal Eurydice.

    Up through the ghastly dead
    She came, with shining eyes
          And red
    Sweet lips of child-surprise.

    Up through the wizened crowds
    She stole, as steals the moon
          Through clouds
    Of flowery mist in June.

    He gazed: he ceased to smite
    The golden-chorded lyre:
          Delight
    Consumed his heart with fire.

    Though in that deadly land
    His task was but half-done,
          His hand
    Drooped, and the fight half-won.

    He saw the breasts that glowed,
    The fragrant clouds of hair:
          They flowed
    Around him like a snare.

    _O'er Phlegethon he stood,
    For utmost anguish named:
          The flood
    Below him roared and flamed._

    Out of his hand the lyre
    Suddenly slipped and fell,
          The fire
    Acclaimed it into hell.

    The night grew dark again:
    There came a bitter cry
          Of pain,
    _Oh Love, once more I die!_

    And lo, the earth-dawn broke,
    And like a wraith she fled:
          He woke
    Alone: his love was dead.

    He woke on earth: the day
    Shone coldly: at his side
          There lay
    The body of his bride.


    VII

    Only now when the purple vintage bubbles and winks in the autumn glory,
      Only now when the great white oxen drag the weight of the harvest
          home,
    Sunburnt labourers, under the star of the sunset, sing as an old-world
        story
      How two pale and thwarted lovers ever through Arcady still must roam.

    Faint as the silvery mists of morning over the peaks that the
        noonday parches,
      On through the haunts of the gloaming musk-rose, down to the rivers
          that glisten below,
    Ever they wander from meadow to pinewood, under the whispering
        woodbine arches,
      Faint as the mists of the dews of the dusk when violets dream and
          the moon-winds blow.

    Though the golden lute of Orpheus gathered the splendours of
        earth and heaven,
      All the golden greenwood notes and all the chimes of the changing sea,
    Old men over the fires of winter murmur again that he was not given
      The steadfast heart divine to rule that infinite freedom of harmony.

    Therefore he failed, say they; but we, that have no wisdom, can
        only remember
      How through the purple perfumed pinewoods white Eurydice roamed and
          sung:
    How through the whispering gold of the wheat, where the poppy burned
        like a crimson ember,
      Down to the valley in beauty she came, and under her feet the flowers
          upsprung.

    _Down to the valley she came, for far and far below in the dreaming
        meadows
      Pleaded ever the Voice of voices, calling his love by her golden name;
    So she arose from her home in the hills, and down through the blossoms
        that danced with their shadows,
      Out of the blue of the dreaming distance, down to the heart of her
          lover she came._




FROM THE SHORE


    Love, so strangely lost and found,
      Love, beyond the seas of death,
    Love, immortally re-crowned,
      Love, who swayest this mortal breath,
    Sweetlier to thy lover's ear
      Steals the tale that ne'er was told;
    Bright-eyes, ah, thine arms are near,
      Nearer now than e'er of old.

    When on earth thy hands were mine,
      Mine to hold for evermore,
    Oft we watched the sunset shine
      Lonely from this wave-beat shore;
    Pent in prison-cells of clay,
      Time had power on thee and me:
    Thou and heaven are one to-day,
      One with earth and sky and sea;

    Indivisible and one!
      Beauty hath unlocked the Gate,
    Oped the portals of the sun,
      Burst the bars of Time and Fate!
    Violets in the dawn of Spring
      Hold the secret of thine eyes:
    Lilies bare their breasts and fling
      Scents of thee from Paradise.

    Brooklets have thy talk by rote;
      Thy farewells array the West;
    Fur that clasped thee round the throat
      Leaps--a squirrel--to its nest!
    Backward from a sparkling eye
      Half-forgotten jests return
    Where the rabbit lollops by
      Hurry-scurry through the fern!

    Roses where I lonely pass
      Brush my brow and breathe thy kiss:
    Zephyrs, whispering through the grass,
      Lure me on from bliss to bliss:
    Here thy robe is rustling close,
      There thy fluttering lace is blown,--
    All the tide of beauty flows
      Tributary to thine own.

    Birds that sleek their shining throats
      Capture every curve from thee:
    All their golden warbled notes,
      Fragments of thy melody,
    Crowding, clustering, one by one,
      Build it upward, spray by spray,
    Till the lavrock in the sun
      Pours thy rapture down the day.

    Silver birch and purple pine,
      Crumpled fern and crimson rose,
    Flash to feel their beauty thine,
      Clasp and fold thee, warm and close:
    Every beat and gleam of wings
      Holds thee in its bosom furled;
    All that chatters, laughs, and sings,
      Darts thy sparkle round the world.

    _Love, so strangely lost and found,
      Love, beyond the seas of death,
    Love, immortally re-crowned,
      Love, who swayest this mortal breath,
    Sweetlier to thy lover's ear
      Steals the tale that ne'er was told;
    Bright eyes, ah, thine arms are near,
      Nearer now than e'er of old._




THE RETURN


    O, hedges white with laughing may,
      O, meadows where we met,
    This heart of mine will break to-day
      Unless ye, too, forget.

    Breathe not so sweet, breathe not so sweet,
      But swiftly let me pass
    Across the fields that felt her feet
      In the old time that was.

    A year ago, but one brief year,
      O, happy flowering land,
    We wandered here and whispered there,
      And hand was warm in hand.

    O, crisp white clouds beyond the hill,
      O, lavrock in the skies,
    Why do ye all remember still
      Her bright uplifted eyes.

    Red heather on the windy moor,
      Wild thyme beside the way,
    White jasmine by the cottage door,
      Harden your hearts to-day.

    Smile not so kind, smile not so kind,
      Thou happy haunted place,
    Or thou wilt strike these poor eyes blind
      With her remembered face.




REMEMBRANCE


    O, unforgotten lips, grey haunting eyes,
      Soft curving cheeks and heart-remembered brow,
    It is all true, the old love never dies;
      And, parted, we must meet for ever now.

    We did not think it true! We did not think
      Love meant this universal cry of pain,
    This crown of thorn, this vinegar to drink,
      This lonely crucifixion o'er again.

    Yet through the darkness of the sleepless night
      Your tortured face comes meekly answering mine;
    Dumb, but I know why those mute lips are white;
      Dark, but I know why those dark lashes shine.

    O, love, love, love, what death can set us free
    From this implacable ghost of memory?




A PRAYER


    Only a little, O Father, only to rest
      Or ever the night comes and the eternal sleep,
      Only to rest a little, a little to weep
    In the dead love's pitiful arms, on the dead love's breast,

    A little to loosen the frozen fountains, to free
      Rivers of blood and tears that should slacken the pulse
      Of this pitiless heart, and appease these pangs that convulse
    Body and soul; oh, out of Eternity,

    A moment to whisper, only a moment to tell
      My dead, my dead, what words are so helpless to say--
      The dreams unuttered, the prayers no passion could pray,
    And then--the eternal sleep or the pains of hell,

    I could welcome them, Father, gladly as ever a child
      Laying his head on the pillow might turn to his rest
      And remember in dreams, as the hand of the mother is prest
    On his hair, how the Pitiful blessed him of old and smiled.




LOVE'S GHOST


    I

    Thy house is dark and still: I stand once more
            Beside the marble door.
    It opens as of old: thy pale, pale face
            Peers thro' the narrow space:
    Thy hands are mine, thy hands are mine to hold,
            Just as of old.


    II

    "Hush! hush! or God will hear us! Ah, speak low
            As Love spake long ago."
    "Sweet, sweet, are these thine arms, thy breast, thy hair
            Assuaging my despair,
    Assuaging the long thirst, quenching the tears
            Of all these years?


    III

    "Thy house is deep and still: God cannot hear;
            Sweet, have no fear!
    Are not thy cold lips crushed against my kiss?
            Love gives us this,
    Not God;" but "Ah," she moans, "God hears us; speak,
            Speak low, hide cheek on cheek."


    IV

    Oh then what eager whisperings, hoarded long,
            Sweeter than any song,
    What treasured news to tell, what hopes, what fears,
            Gleaned from the barren years,
    What raptures wrung from out the heart of pain,
            What wild farewells again!


    V

    Whose pity is this? Ah, quick, one kiss! Once more
            Closes the marble door!
    I grope here in the darkness all alone.
            Across the cold white stone,
    Over thy tomb, a sudden starlight gleams:
            Death gave me this--in dreams.




ON A RAILWAY PLATFORM


    A drizzle of drifting rain
      And a blurred white lamp o'erhead,
    That shines as my love will shine again
      In the world of the dead.

    Round me the wet black night,
      And, afar in the limitless gloom,
    Crimson and green, two blossoms of light,
      Two stars of doom.

    But the night of death is aflare
      With a torch of back-blown fire,
    And the coal-black deeps of the quivering air
      Rend for my soul's desire.

    Leap, heart, for the pulse and the roar
      And the lights of the streaming train
    That leaps with the heart of thy love once more
      Out of the mist and the rain.

    Out of the desolate years
      The thundering pageant flows;
    But I see no more than a window of tears
      Which her face has turned to a rose.




OXFORD REVISITED


    Changed and estranged, like a ghost, I pass the familiar portals,
      Echoing now like a tomb, they accept me no more as of old;
    Yet I go wistfully onward, a shade thro' a kingdom of mortals
      Wanting a face to greet me, a hand to grasp and to hold.

    Hardly I know as I go if the beautiful City is only
      Mocking me under the moon, with its streams and its willows agleam,
    Whether the City or friends or I that am friendless and lonely,
      Whether the boys that go by or the time-worn towers be the dream;

    Whether the walls that I know, or the unknown fugitive faces,
      Faces like those that I loved, faces that haunt and waylay,
    Faces so like and unlike, in the dim unforgettable places,
      Startling the heart into sickness that aches with the sweet of
        the May,--

    Whether all these or the world with its wars be the wandering shadows!
      Ah, sweet over green-gloomed waters the may hangs, crimson and white;
    And quiet canoes creep down by the warm gold dusk of the meadows,
      Lapping with little splashes and ripples of silvery light.

    Others as I have returned: I shall see the old faces to-morrow,
      Down by the gay-coloured barges, alert for the throb of the oars,
    Wanting to row once again, or tenderly jesting with sorrow
      Up the old stairways and noting the strange new names on the doors.

    Is it a dream? And I know not nor care if there be an awaking
      Ever at all any more, for the years that have torn us apart,
    Few, so few as they are, will ever be rending and breaking:
      Sooner by far than I knew have they wrought this change for my heart!

    Well; I grow used to it now! Could the dream but remain and for ever,
      With the flowers round the grey quadrangle laughing as time grows old!
    For the waters go down to the sea, but the sky still gleams on the river!
      We plucked them--but there shall be lilies, ivory lilies and gold.

    And still, in the beautiful City, the river of life is no duller,
      Only a little strange as the eighth hour dreamily chimes,
    In the City of friends and echoes, ribbons and music and colour,
      Lilac and blossoming chestnut, willows and whispering limes.

    Over the Radcliffe Dome the moon as the ghost of a flower
      Weary and white awakes in the phantom fields of the sky:
    The trustful shepherded clouds are asleep over steeple and tower,
      Dark under Magdalen walls the Cher like a dream goes by.

    Back, we come wandering back, poor ghosts, to the home that one misses
      Out in the shelterless world, the world that was heaven to us then,
    Back from the coil and the vastness, the stars and the boundless abysses,
      Like monks from a pilgrimage stealing in bliss to their cloisters
        again.

    City of dreams that we lost, accept now the gift we inherit--
      Love, such a love as we knew not of old in the blaze of our noon,
    We that have found thee at last, half City, half heavenly Spirit,
      While over a mist of spires the sunset mellows the moon.




THE THREE SHIPS

(_To an old Tune_)


    I

    As I went up the mountain-side,
    The sea below me glittered wide,
    And, Eastward, far away, I spied
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    The three great ships that take the tide
            On Christmas Day in the morning.


    II

    Ye have heard the song, how these must ply
    From the harbours of home to the ports o' the sky!
    Do ye dream none knoweth the whither and why
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    The three great ships go sailing by
            On Christmas Day in the morning?


    III

    Yet, as I live, I never knew
    That ever a song could ring so true,
    Till I saw them break thro' a haze of blue
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And the marvellous ancient flags they flew
            On Christmas Day in the morning!


    IV

    From the heights above the belfried town
    I saw that the sails were patched and brown,
    But the flags were a-flame with a great renown
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    And on every mast was a golden crown
            On Christmas Day in the morning.


    V

    Most marvellous ancient ships were these!
    Were their prows a-plunge to the Chersonese?
    For the pomp of Rome or the glory of Greece,
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day,
    Were they out on a quest for the Golden Fleece
            On Christmas Day in the morning?


    VI

    And the sun and the wind they told me there
    How goodly a load the three ships bear,
    For the first is gold and the second is myrrh
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
    And the third is frankincense most rare
            On Christmas Day in the morning.


    VII

    They have mixed their shrouds with the golden sky,
    They have faded away where the last dreams die ...
    Ah yet, will ye watch, when the mist lifts high
            On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day?
    Will ye see three ships come sailing by
            On Christmas Day in the morning?




SLUMBER-SONGS OF THE MADONNA


PRELUDE


    Dante saw the great white Rose
            Half unclose;
    Dante saw the golden bees
      Gathering from its heart of gold
            Sweets untold,
    Love's most honeyed harmonies.

    Dante saw the threefold bow
            Strangely glow,
    Saw the Rainbow Vision rise,
      And the Flame that wore the crown
            Bending down
    O'er the flowers of Paradise.

    Something yet remained, it seems;
            In his dreams
    Dante missed--as angels may
      In their white and burning bliss--
            Some small kiss
    Mortals meet with every day.

    Italy in splendour faints
            'Neath her saints!
    O, her great Madonnas, too,
      Faces calm as any moon
            Glows in June,
    Hooded with the night's deep blue!

    What remains? I pass and hear
            Everywhere,
    Ay, or see in silent eyes
      Just the song she still would sing
            Thus--a-swing
    O'er the cradle where He lies.


    I

    Sleep, little baby, I love thee.
    Sleep, little king, I am bending above thee.
            How should I know what to sing
    Here in my arms as I swing thee to sleep?
                    Hushaby low,
                    Rockaby so,
    Kings may have wonderful jewels to bring,
    Mother has only a kiss for her king!
    Why should my singing so make me to weep?
    Only I know that I love thee, I love thee,
            Love thee, my little one, sleep.


    II

      Is it a dream? Ah yet, it seems
      Not the same as other dreams!
    I can but think that angels sang,
      When thou wast born, in the starry sky,
    And that their golden harps out-rang
      While the silver clouds went by!

    The morning sun shuts out the stars,
      Which are much loftier than the sun;
    But, could we burst our prison-bars
      And find the Light whence light begun,
    The dreams that heralded thy birth
    Were truer than the truths of earth;
    And, by that far immortal Gleam,
    Soul of my soul, I still would dream!

    A ring of light was round thy head,
    The great-eyed oxen nigh thy bed
    Their cold and innocent noses bowed!
    Their sweet breath rose like an incense cloud
    In the blurred and mystic lanthorn light.

    About the middle of the night
    The black door blazed like some great star
    With a glory from afar,
    Or like some mighty chrysolite
    Wherein an angel stood with white
    Blinding arrowy bladed wings
    Before the throne of the King of kings;
    And, through it, I could dimly see
    A great steed tethered to a tree.

    Then, with crimson gems aflame
    Through the door the three kings came,
    And the black Ethiop unrolled
    The richly broidered cloth of gold,
    And pourèd forth before thee there
    Gold and frankincense and myrrh!


    III

    See, what a wonderful smile! Does it mean
      That my little one knows of my love?
    Was it meant for an angel that passed unseen,
      And smiled at us both from above?
    Does it mean that he knows of the birds and the flowers
    That are waiting to sweeten his childhood's hours,
    And the tales I shall tell and the games he will play,
    And the songs we shall sing and the prayers we shall pray
                    In his boyhood's May,
                    He and I, one day?


    IV

    For in the warm blue summer weather
    We shall laugh and love together:
      I shall watch my baby growing,
    I shall guide his feet,
      When the orange trees are blowing
    And the winds are heavy and sweet!

      When the orange orchards whiten
      I shall see his great eyes brighten
    To watch the long-legged camels going
      Up the twisted street,
    When the orange trees are blowing
      And the winds are sweet.

    _What does it mean? Indeed, it seems
    A dream! Yet not like other dreams!_

    We shall walk in pleasant vales,
      Listening to the shepherd's song
    I shall tell him lovely tales
      All day long:
    He shall laugh while mother sings
    Tales of fishermen and kings.

    He shall see them come and go
      O'er the wistful sea,
    Where rosy oleanders blow
      Round blue Lake Galilee,
    Kings with fishers' ragged coats
    And silver nets across their boats,
    Dipping through the starry glow,
    With crowns for him and me!
            Ah, no;
    Crowns for him, not me!

    _Rockaby so! Indeed, it seems
    A dream! Yet not like other dreams!_


    V

    Ah, see what a wonderful smile again!
      Shall I hide it away in my heart,
    To remember one day in a world of pain
      When the years have torn us apart,
            Little babe,
    When the years have torn us apart?

    Sleep, my little one, sleep,
      Child with the wonderful eyes,
      Wild miraculous eyes,
    Deep as the skies are deep!
    What star-bright glory of tears
    Waits in you now for the years
    That shall bid you waken and weep?
    Ah, in that day, could I kiss you to sleep
    Then, little lips, little eyes,
    Little lips that are lovely and wise,
    Little lips that are dreadful and wise!


    VI

    Clenched little hands like crumpled roses
            Dimpled and dear,
    Feet like flowers that the dawn uncloses,
            What do I fear?
    Little hands, will you ever be clenched in anguish?
    White little limbs, will you droop and languish?
            Nay, what do I hear?
    I hear a shouting, far away,
    You shall ride on a kingly palm-strewn way
            Some day!

    But when you are crowned with a golden crown
        And throned on a golden throne,
    You'll forget the manger of Bethlehem town
        And your mother that sits alone

    Wondering whether the mighty king
    Remembers a song she used to sing,
            Long ago,
            "_Rockaby so,
    Kings may have wonderful jewels to bring,
    Mother has only a kiss for her king_!"...

    Ah, see what a wonderful smile, once more!
        He opens his great dark eyes!
    Little child, little king, nay, hush, it is o'er
        My fear of those deep twin skies,--
          Little child,
        You are all too dreadful and wise!


    VII

    But now you are mine, all mine,
      And your feet can lie in my hand so small,
    And your tiny hands in my heart can twine,
      And you cannot walk, so you never shall fall,
    Or be pierced by the thorns beside the door,
    Or the nails that lie upon Joseph's floor;
    Through sun and rain, through shadow and shine,
      You are mine, all mine!




ENCELADUS


    _In the Black Country, from a little window,
    Before I slept, across the haggard wastes
    Of dust and ashes, I saw Titanic shafts
    Like shadowy columns of wan-hope arise
    To waste, on the blear sky, their slow sad wreaths
    Of smoke, their infinitely sad slow prayers.
    Then, as night deepened, the blast-furnaces,
    Red smears upon the sulphurous blackness, turned
    All that sad region to a City of Dis,
    Where naked, sweating giants all night long
    Bowed their strong necks, melted flesh, blood and bone,
    To brim the dry ducts of the gods of gloom
    With terrible rivers, branches of living gold._

    _O, like some tragic gesture of great souls
    In agony, those awful columns towered
    Against the clouds, that city of ash and slag
    Assumed the grandeur of some direr Thebes
    Arising to the death-chant of those gods,
    A dreadful Order climbing from the dark
    Of Chaos and Corruption, threatening to take
    Heaven with its vast slow storm.
                                  I slept, and dreamed.
    And like the slow beats of some Titan heart
    Buried beneath immeasurable woes,
    The forging-hammers thudded through the dream:_

    Huge on a fallen tree,
    Lost in the darkness of primeval woods,
    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    The naked giant, brooded all alone.
    Born of the lower earth, he knew not how,
    Born of the mire and clay, he knew not when,
    Brought forth in darkness, and he knew not why!

    Thus, like a wind, went by a thousand years.

    Anhungered, yet no comrade of the wolf,
    And cold, but with no power upon the sun,
    A master of this world that mastered him!

    Thus, like a cloud, went by a thousand years.

    _Who_ chained this other giant in his heart
    That heaved and burned like Etna? Heavily
    He bent his brows and wondered and was dumb.

    And, like one wave, a thousand years went by.

    He raised his matted head and scanned the stars.
    He stood erect! He lifted his uncouth arms!
    With inarticulate sounds his uncouth lips
    Wrestled and strove--_I am full-fed, and yet
    I hunger!
    Who set this fiercer famine in my maw?_

    _Can I eat moons, gorge on the Milky Way,
    Swill sunsets down, or sup the wash of the dawn
    Out of the rolling swine-troughs of the sea?
    Can I drink oceans, lie beneath the mountains,
    And nuzzle their heavy boulders like a cub
    Sucking the dark teats of the tigress? Who,
    Who set this deeper hunger in my heart?_
    And the dark forest echoed--_Who? Ah, who?_

    "_I hunger!_"
    And the night-wind answered him,
    "Hunt, then, for food."

    "_I hunger!_"
    And the sleek gorged lioness
    Drew nigh him, dripping freshly from the kill,
    Redder her lolling tongue, whiter her fangs,
    And gazed with ignorant eyes of golden flame.

    "_I hunger!_"
    Like a breaking sea his cry
    Swept through the night. Against his swarthy knees
    She rubbed the red wet velvet of her ears
    With mellow thunders of unweeting bliss,
    Purring--_Ah, seek, and you shall find.
    Ah, seek, and you shall slaughter, gorge, ah seek,
    Seek, seek, you shall feed full, ah seek, ah seek._

    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    Bewildered like a desert-pilgrim, saw
    A rosy City, opening in the clouds,
    The hunger-born mirage of his own heart,
    Far, far above the world, a home of gods,
    Where One, a goddess, veiled in the sleek waves
    Of her deep hair, yet glimmering golden through,
    Lifted, with radiant arms, ambrosial food
    For hunger such as this! Up the dark hills,
    He rushed, a thunder-cloud,
    Urged by the famine of his heart. He stood
    High on the topmost crags, he hailed the gods
    In thunder, and the clouds re-echoed it!

    He hailed the gods!
    And like a sea of thunder round their thrones
    Washing, a midnight sea, his earth-born voice
    Besieged the halls of heaven! He hailed the gods!
    They laughed, he heard them laugh!
    With echo and re-echo, far and wide,
    A golden sea of mockery, they laughed!

    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    Laid hold upon the rosy Gates of Heaven,
    And shook them with gigantic sooty hands,
    Asking he knew not what, but not for alms;
    And the Gates, opened as in jest;
    And, like a sooty jest, he stumbled in.

    Round him the gods, the young and scornful gods,
    Clustered and laughed to mark the ravaged face,
    The brutal brows, the deep and dog-like eyes,
    The blunt black nails, and back with burdens bowed.
    And, when they laughed, he snarled with uncouth lips
    And made them laugh again.
                              "_Whence comest thou?_"
    He could not speak!
    How should he speak whose heart within him heaved
    And burned like Etna? Through his mouth there came
    A sound of ice-bergs in a frozen sea
    Of tears, a sullen region of black ice
    Rending and breaking, very far away.
    They laughed!
    He stared at them, bewildered, and they laughed
    Again, "_Whence comest thou?_"

    He could not speak!
    But through his mouth a moan of midnight woods,
    Where wild beasts lay in wait to slaughter and gorge,
    A moan of forest-caverns where the wolf
    Brought forth her litter, a moan of the wild earth
    In travail with strange shapes of mire and clay,
    Creatures of clay, clay images of the gods,
    That hungered like the gods, the most high gods,
    But found no food, and perished like the beasts.

    And the gods laughed,--
    _Art thou, then, such a god?_ And, like a leaf
    Unfolding in dark woods, in his deep brain
    A sudden memory woke; and like an ape
    He nodded, and all heaven with laughter rocked,
    While Artemis cried out with scornful lips,--
    _Perchance He is the Maker of you all!_

    Then, piteously outstretching calloused hands,
    He sank upon his knees, his huge gnarled knees,
    And echoed, falteringly, with slow harsh tongue,--
    _Perchance, perchance, the Maker of you all._

    They wept with laughter! And Aphrodite, she,
    With keener mockery than white Artemis
    Who smiled aloof, drew nigh him unabashed
    In all her blinding beauty. Carelessly,
    As o'er the brute brows of a stallèd ox
    Across that sooty muzzle and brawny breast,
    Contemptuously, she swept her golden hair
    In one deep wave, a many-millioned scourge
    Intolerable and beautiful as fire;
    Then turned and left him, reeling, gasping, dumb,
    While heaven re-echoed and re-echoed, _See,
    Perchance, perchance, the Maker of us all!_

    Enceladus, earth-born Enceladus,
    Rose to his feet, and with one terrible cry
    "_I hunger_," rushed upon the scornful gods
    And strove to seize and hold them with his hands,
    And still the laughter deepened as they rolled
    Their clouds around them, baffling him. But once,
    Once with a shout, in his gigantic arms
    He crushed a slippery splendour on his breast
    And felt on his harsh skin the cool smooth peaks
    Of Aphrodite's bosom. One black hand
    Slid down the naked snow of her long side
    And bruised it where he held her. Then, like snow
    Vanishing in a furnace, out of his arms
    The splendour suddenly melted, and a roll
    Of thunder split the dream, and headlong down
    He fell, from heaven to earth; while, overhead
    The young and scornful gods--he heard them laugh!--
    Toppled the crags down after him. He lay
    Supine. They plucked up Etna by the roots
    And buried him beneath it. His broad breast
    Heaved, like that other giant in his heart,
    And through the crater burst his fiery breath,
    But could not burst his bonds. And so he lay
    Breathing in agony thrice a thousand years.

    Then came a Voice, he knew not whence, "Arise,
    Enceladus!" And from his heart a crag
    Fell, and one arm was free, and one thought free,
    And suddenly he awoke, and stood upright,
    Shaking the mountains from him like a dream;
    And the tremendous light and awful truth
    Smote, like the dawn, upon his blinded eyes,
    That out of his first wonder at the world,
    Out of his own heart's deep humility,
    And simple worship, he had fashioned gods
    Of cloud, and heaven out of a hollow shell.
    And groping now no more in the empty space
    Outward, but inward in his own deep heart,
    He suddenly felt the secret gates of heaven
    Open, and from the infinite heavens of hope
    Inward, a voice, from the innermost courts of Love,
    Rang--_Thou shall have none other gods but Me._

    Enceladus, the foul Enceladus,
    When the clear light out of that inward heaven
    Whose gates are only inward in the soul,
    Showed him that one true Kingdom, said,
                                   "I will stretch
    My hands out once again. And, as the God
    That made me is the Heart within my heart,
    So shall my heart be to this dust and earth
    A god and a creator. I will strive
    With mountains, fires and seas, wrestle and strive,
    Fashion and make, and that which I have made
    In anguish I shall love as God loves me."

    _In the Black Country, from a little window,
    Waking at dawn, I saw those giant Shafts
    --O great dark word out of our elder speech,
    Long since the poor man's kingly heritage--
    The Shapings, the dim Sceptres of Creation,
    The Shafts like columns of wan-hope arise
    To waste, on the blear sky, their slow sad wreaths
    Of smoke, their infinitely sad slow prayers.
    Then, as the dawn crimsoned, the sordid clouds,
    The puddling furnaces, the mounds of slag,
    The cinders, and the sand-beds and the rows
    Of wretched roofs, assumed a majesty
    Beyond all majesties of earth or air;
    Beauty beyond all beauty, as of a child
    In rags, upraised thro' the still gold of heaven,
    With wasted arms and hungering eyes, to bring
    The armoured seraphim down upon their knees
    And teach eternal God humility;
    The solemn beauty of the unfulfilled
    Moving towards fulfilment on a height
    Beyond all heights; the dreadful beauty of hope;
    The naked wrestler struggling from the rock
    Under the sculptor's chisel; the rough mass
    Of clay more glorious for the poor blind face
    And bosom that half emerge into the light,
    More glorious and august, even in defeat,
    Than that too cold dominion God foreswore
    To bear this passionate universal load,
    This Calvary of Creation, with mankind._


IN THE COOL OF THE EVENING

    I

    In the cool of the evening, when the low sweet whispers waken,
      When the labourers turn them homeward, and the weary have their will,
    When the censers of the roses o'er the forest-aisles are shaken,
      Is it but the wind that cometh o'er the far green hill?


    II

    For they say 'tis but the sunset winds that wander through the heather,
      Rustle all the meadow-grass and bend the dewy fern;
    They say 'tis but the winds that bow the reeds in prayer together,
      And fill the shaken pools with fire along the shadowy burn.


    III

    In the beauty of the twilight, in the Garden that He loveth,
      They have veiled His lovely vesture with the darkness of a name!
    Thro' His Garden, thro' His Garden it is but the wind that moveth,
      No more; but O, the miracle, the miracle is the same!


    IV

    In the cool of the evening, when the sky is an old story
      Slowly dying, but remembered, ay, and loved with passion still,
    Hush!... the fringes of His garment, in the fading golden glory,
      Softly rustling as He cometh o'er the far green hill.




A ROUNDHEAD'S RALLYING SONG


    I

    How beautiful is the battle,
      How splendid are the spears,
    When our banner is the sky
    And our watchword _Liberty_,
      And our kingdom lifted high above the years.


    II

    How purple shall our blood be,
      How glorious our scars,
    When we lie there in the night
    With our faces full of light
      And the death upon them smiling at the stars.


    III

    How golden is our hauberk,
      And steel, and steel our sword,
    And our shield without a stain
    As we take the field again,
      We whose armour is the armour of the Lord!




VICISTI, GALILÆE


    "The shrines are dust, the gods are dead,"
      They cried in ancient Rome!
    "Ah yet, the Idalian rose is red,
      And bright the Paphian foam:
    For all your Galilæan tears
      We turn to her," men say ...
    But we, we hasten thro' the years
      To our own yesterday.

    Thro' all the thousand years ye need
      To make the lost so fair,
    Before ye can award His meed
      Of perfect praise and prayer!
    Ye liberated souls, the crown
      Is yours; and yet, some few
    Can hail, as this great Cross goes down
      Its distant triumph, too.

    Poor scornful Lilliputian souls,
      And are ye still too proud
    To risk your little aureoles
      By kneeling with the crowd?
    Do ye still dream ye "stand alone"
      So fearless and so strong?
    To-day we claim the rebels' throne
      And leave you with the throng.

    Yes, He has conquered! You at least
      The "van-guard" leaves behind
    To croon old tales of king and priest
      In the ingles of mankind:
    The breast of Aphrodite glows,
      Apollo's face is fair;
    But O, the world's wide anguish knows
      No Apollonian prayer.

    Not ours to scorn the first white gleam
      Of beauty on this earth,
    The clouds of dawn, the nectarous dream,
      The gods of simpler birth;
    But, as ye praise them, your own cry
      Is fraught with deeper pain,
    And the Compassionate ye deny
      Returns, returns again.

    O, worshippers of the beautiful,
      Is this the end then, this,--
    That ye can only see the skull
      Beneath the face of bliss?
    No monk in the dark years ye scorn
      So barren a pathway trod
    As ye who, ceasing not to mourn,
      Deny the mourner's God.

    And, while ye scoff, on every side
      Great hints of Him go by,--
    Souls that are hourly crucified
      On some new Calvary!
    O, tortured faces, white and meek,
      Half seen amidst the crowd,
    Grey suffering lips that never speak,
      The Glory in the Cloud!

    _In flower and dust, in chaff and grain,
      He binds Himself and dies!
    We live by His eternal pain,
      His hourly sacrifice;
    The limits of our mortal life
      Are His._ The whisper thrills
    Under the sea's perpetual strife,
      And through the sunburnt hills.

    Darkly, as in a glass, our sight
      Still gropes thro' Time and Space:
    We cannot see the Light of Light
      With angels, face to face:
    Only the tale His martyrs tell
      Around the dark earth rings
    He died and He went down to hell
      And lives--the King of Kings!

    And, while ye scoff, from shore to shore,
      From sea to moaning sea,
    _Eloi_, _Eloi_, goes up once more
      _Lama sabacthani!_
    The heavens are like a scroll unfurled,
      The writing flames above--
    This is the King of all the world
      Upon His Cross of Love.




DRAKE

_DEDICATED TO RUDOLPH CHAMBERS LEHMANN_




PROLOGUE TO AMERICAN EDITION


    I

      England, my mother,
        Lift to my western sweetheart
    One full cup of English mead, breathing of the may!
      Pledge the may-flower in her face that you and ah, none other,
        Sent her from the mother-land
          Across the dashing spray.


    II


      Hers and yours the story:
        Think of it, oh, think of it--
    That immortal dream when El Dorado flushed the skies!
      Fill the beaker full and drink to Drake's undying glory,
        Yours and hers (Oh, drink of it!)
          The dream that never dies.


    III

      Yours and hers the free-men
        Who scanned the stars and westward sung
    When a king commanded and the Atlantic thundered "Nay!"
      Hers as yours the pride is, for Drake our first of seamen
        First upon his bow-sprit hung
          That bunch of English may.


    IV

      Pledge her deep, my mother;
        Through her veins thy life-stream runs!
    Spare a thought, too, sweetheart, for my mother o'er the sea!
      Younger eyes are yours; but ah, those old eyes and none other
        Once bedewed the may-flower; once,
          As yours, were clear and free.


    V

      Once! Nay, now as ever
        Beats within her ancient heart
    All the faith that took you forth to seek your heaven alone:
      Shadows come and go; but let no shade of doubt dissever,
        Cloak, or cloud, or keep apart
          Two souls whose prayer is one.


    VI

      Sweetheart, ah, be tender--
        Tender with her prayer to-night!
    Such a goal might yet be ours!--the battle-flags be furled,
      All the wars of earth be crushed, if only now your slender
        Hand should grasp her gnarled old hand
          And federate the world.


    VII

      Foolish it may seem, sweet!
        Still the battle thunder lours:
    Darker look the Dreadnoughts as old Europe goes her way!
      Yet your hand, your hand, has power to crush that evil dream, sweet;
        You, with younger eyes than ours
          And brows of English may.


    VIII

      If a singer cherishes
        Idle dreams or idle words,
    You shall judge--and you'll forgive: for, far away or nigh,
      Still abides that Vision without which a people perishes:
        Love will strike the atoning chords!
          Hark--there comes a cry!


    IX

      Over all this earth, sweet,
        The poor and weak look up to you--
    Lift their burdened shoulders, stretch their fettered hands in prayer:
      You, with gentle hands, can bring the world-wide dream to birth, sweet,
        While I lift this cup to you
          And wonder--will she care?


    X

      Kindle, eyes, and beat, heart!
        Hold the brimming breaker up!
    All the may is burgeoning from East to golden West!
      England, my mother, greet America, my sweetheart:
        --Ah, but ere I drained the cup
          I found her on your breast.




EXORDIUM


    When on the highest ridge of that strange land,
    Under the cloudless blinding tropic blue,
    Drake and his band of swarthy seamen stood
    With dazed eyes gazing round them, emerald fans
    Of palm that fell like fountains over cliffs
    Of gorgeous red anana bloom obscured
    Their sight on every side. Illustrious gleams
    Of rose and green and gold streamed from the plumes
    That flashed like living rainbows through the glades.
    Piratic glints of musketoon and sword,
    The scarlet scarves around the tawny throats,
    The bright gold ear-rings in the sun-black ears,
    And the calm faces of the negro guides
    Opposed their barbarous bravery to the noon;
    Yet a deep silence dreadfully besieged
    Even those mighty hearts upon the verge
    Of the undiscovered world. Behind them lay
    The old earth they knew. In front they could not see
    What lay beyond the ridge. Only they heard
    Cries of the painted birds troubling the heat
    And shivering through the woods; till Francis Drake
    Plunged through the hush, took hold upon a tree,
    The tallest near them, and clomb upward, branch
    By branch.
                And there, as he swung clear above
    The steep-down forest, on his wondering eyes,
    Mile upon mile of rugged shimmering gold,
    Burst the unknown immeasurable sea.
    Then he descended; and with a new voice
    Vowed that, God helping, he would one day plough
    Those virgin waters with an English keel.

    So here before the unattempted task,
    Above the Golden Ocean of my dream
    I clomb and saw in splendid pageant pass
    The wild adventures and heroic deeds
    Of England's epic age, a vision lit
    With mighty prophecies, fraught with a doom
    Worthy the great Homeric roll of song,
    Yet all unsung and unrecorded quite
    By those who might have touched with Raphael's hand
    The large imperial legend of our race,
    Ere it brought forth the braggarts of an hour,
    Self-worshippers who love their imaged strength,
    And as a symbol for their own proud selves
    Misuse the sacred name of this dear land,
    While England to the Empire of her soul
    Like some great Prophet passes through the crowd
    That cannot understand; for he must climb
    Up to that sovran thunder-smitten peak
    Where he shall grave and trench on adamant
    The Law that God shall utter by the still
    Small voice, not by the whirlwind or the fire.
    There labouring for the Highest in himself
    He shall achieve the good of all mankind;
    And from that lonely Sinai shall return
    Triumphant o'er the little gods of gold
    That rule their little hour upon the plain.

    Oh, thou blind master of these opened eyes
    Be near me, therefore, now; for not in pride
    I lift lame hands to this imperious theme;
    But yearning to a power above mine own
    Even as a man might lift his hands in prayer.
    Or as a child, perchance, in those dark days
    When London lay beleaguered and the axe
    Flashed out for a bigot empire; and the blood
    Of martyrs made a purple path for Spain
    Up to the throne of Mary; as a child
    Gathering with friends upon a winter's morn
    For some mock fight between the hateful prince
    Philip and Thomas Wyatt, all at once
    Might see in gorgeous ruffs embastioned
    Popinjay plumes and slouching hats of Spain,
    Gay shimmering silks and rich encrusted gems,
    Gold collars, rare brocades, and sleek trunk-hose
    The Ambassador and peacock courtiers come
    Strutting along the white snow-strangled street,
    A walking plot of scarlet Spanish flowers,
    And with one cry a hundred boyish hands
    Put them to flight with snowballs, while the wind
    All round their Spanish ears hissed like a flight
    Of white-winged geese; so may I wage perchance
    A mimic war with all my heart in it,
    Munitioned with mere perishable snow
    Which mightier hands one day will urge with steel.
    Yet may they still remember me as I
    Remember, with one little laugh of love,
    That child's game, this were wealth enough for me.

    Mother and love, fair England, hear my prayer;
    Help me that I may tell the enduring tale
    Of that great seaman, good at need, who first
    Sailed round this globe and made one little isle,
    One little isle against that huge Empire
    Of Spain whose might was paramount on earth,
    O'ertopping Babylon, Nineveh, Greece, and Rome,
    Carthage and all huge Empires of the past,
    He made this little isle, against the world,
    Queen of the earth and sea. Nor this alone
    The theme; for, in a mightier strife engaged
    Even than he knew, he fought for the new faiths,
    Championing our manhood as it rose
    And cast its feudal chains before the seat
    Of kings; nay, in a mightier battle yet
    He fought for the soul's freedom, fought the fight
    Which, though it still rings in our wondering ears,
    Was won then and for ever--that great war,
    That last Crusade of Christ against His priests,
    Wherein Spain fell behind a thunderous roar
    Of ocean triumph over burning ships
    And shattered fleets, while England, England rose,
    Her white cliffs laughing out across the waves,
    Victorious over all her enemies.

    And while he won the world for her domain,
    Her loins brought forth, her fostering bosom fed
    Souls that have swept the spiritual seas
    From heaven to hell, and justified her crown.
    For round the throne of great Elizabeth
    Spenser and Burleigh, Sidney and Verulam,
    Clustered like stars, rare Jonson like the crown
    Of Cassiopeia, Marlowe ruddy as Mars,
    And over all those mighty hearts arose
    The soul of Shakespeare brooding far and wide
    Beyond our small horizons, like a light
    Thrown from a vaster sun that still illumes
    Tracts which the arc of our increasing day
    Must still leave undiscovered, unexplored.

    Mother and love, fair England, hear my prayer,
    As thou didst touch the heart and light the flame
    Of wonder in those eyes which first awoke
    To beauty and the sea's adventurous dream
    Three hundred years ago, three hundred years,
    And five long decades, in the leafy lanes
    Of Devon, where the tallest trees that bore
    The raven's matted nest had yielded up
    Their booty, while the perilous branches swayed
    Beneath the boyish privateer, the king
    Of many young companions, Francis Drake;
    So hear me, and so help, for more than his
    My need is, even than when he first set sail
    Upon that wild adventure with three ships
    And three-score men from grey old Plymouth Sound,
    Not knowing if he went to life or death,
    Not caring greatly, so that he were true
    To his own sleepless and unfaltering soul
    Which could not choose but hear the ringing call
    Across the splendours of the Spanish Main
    From ever fading, ever new horizons,
    And shores beyond the sunset and the sea.

    Mother and sweetheart, England; from whose breast,
    With all the world before them, they went forth,
    Thy seamen, o'er the wide uncharted waste,
    Wider than that Ulysses roamed of old,
    Even as the wine-dark Mediterranean
    Is wider than some wave-relinquished pool
    Among its rocks, yet none the less explored
    To greater ends than all the pride of Greece
    And pomp of Rome achieved; if my poor song
    Now spread too wide a sail, forgive thy son
    And lover, for thy love was ever wont
    To lift men up in pride above themselves
    To do great deeds which of themselves alone
    They could not; thou hast led the unfaltering feet
    Of even thy meanest heroes down to death,
    Lifted poor knights to many a great emprise,
    Taught them high thoughts, and though they kept their souls
    Lowly as little children, bidden them lift
    Eyes unappalled by all the myriad stars
    That wheel around the great white throne of God.


BOOK I

    Now through the great doors of the Council-room
    Magnificently streamed in rich array
    The peers of England, regal of aspèct
    And grave. Their silence waited for the Queen:
    And even now she came; and through their midst,
    Low as they bowed, she passed without a smile
    And took her royal seat. A bodeful hush
    Of huge anticipation gripped all hearts,
    Compressed all brows, and loaded the broad noon
    With gathering thunder: none knew what the hour
    Might yet bring forth; but the dark fire of war
    Smouldered in every eye; for every day
    The Council met debating how to join
    Honour with peace, and every day new tales
    Of English wrongs received from the red hands
    Of that gigantic Empire, insolent
    Spain, spurred fiercer resentments up like steeds
    Revolting, on the curb, foaming for battle,
    In all men's minds, against whatever odds.
    On one side of the throne great Walsingham,
    A lion of England, couchant, watchful, calm,
    Was now the master of opinion: all
    Drew to him. Even the hunchback Burleigh smiled
    With half-ironic admiration now,
    As in the presence of the Queen they met
    Amid the sweeping splendours of her court,
    A cynic smile that seemed to say, "I, too,
    Would fain regain that forthright heart of fire;
    Yet statesmanship is but a smoother name
    For the superior cunning which ensures
    Victory." And the Queen, too, knowing her strength
    And weakness, though her woman's heart leaped out
    To courage, yet with woman's craft preferred
    The subtler strength of Burleigh; for she knew
    Mary of Scotland waited for that war
    To strike her in the side for Rome; she knew
    How many thousands lurked in England still
    Remembering Rome and bloody Mary's reign.
    France o'er a wall of bleeding Huguenots
    Watched for an hour to strike. Against all these
    What shield could England raise, this little isle,--
    Out-matched, outnumbered, perilously near
    Utter destruction?

                        So the long debate
    Proceeded.

                All at once there came a cry
    Along the streets and at the palace-gates
    And at the great doors of the Council-room!
    Then through the pikes and halberds a voice rose
    Imperative for entrance, and the guards
    Made way, and a strange whisper surged around,
    And through the peers of England thrilled the blood
    Of Agincourt as to the foot of the throne
    Came Leicester, for behind him as he came
    A seaman stumbled, travel-stained and torn,
    Crying for justice, and gasped out his tale.
    "The Spaniards," he moaned, "the Inquisition!
    They have taken all my comrades, all our crew,
    And flung them into dungeons: there they lie
    Waiting for England, waiting for their Queen!
    Will you not free them? I alone am left!
    All London is afire with it, for this
    Was one of your chief city merchant's ships--
    The _Pride of London_, one of Osborne's ships!
    But there is none to help them! I escaped
    With shrieks of torment ringing in these ears,
    The glare of torture-chambers in these eyes
    That see no faces anywhere but blind
    Blind faces, each a bruise of white that smiles
    In idiot agony, washed with sweat and blood,
    The face of some strange thing that once was man,
    And now can only turn from side to side
    Babbling like a child, with mouth agape,
    And crying for help where there is none to hear
    Save those black vizards in the furnace-glow,
    Moving like devils at their hellish trade...."
    He paused; his memory sickened, his brain swooned
    Back into that wild glare of obscene pain!
    Once more to his ears and nostrils horribly crept
    The hiss and smell of shrivelling human flesh!
    His dumb stare told the rest: his head sank down;
    He strove in agony
    With what all hideous words must leave untold;
    While Leicester vouched him, "This man's tale is true!"
    But like a gathering storm a low deep moan
    Of passion, like a tiger's, slowly crept
    From the grey lips of Walsingham. "My Queen,
    Will you not free them?"

                              Then Elizabeth,
    Whose name is one for ever with the name
    Of England, rose; and in her face the gleam
    Of justice that makes anger terrible
    Shone, and she stretched her glittering sceptre forth
    And spoke, with distant empires in her eyes.

    "My lords, this is the last cry they shall wring
    From English lips unheeded: we will have
    Such remedies for this as all the world
    Shall tremble at!"
                        And, on that night, while Drake
    Close in his London lodging lay concealed
    Until he knew if it were peace or war
    With Spain (for he had struck on the high seas
    At Spain; and well he knew if it were peace
    His blood would be made witness to that bond,
    And he must die a pirate's death or fly
    Westward once more), there all alone, he pored
    By a struggling rushlight o'er a well-thumbed chart
    Of magic islands in the enchanted seas,
    Dreaming, as boys and poets only dream
    With those that see God's wonders in the deep,
    Perilous visions of those palmy keys,
    Cocoa-nut islands, parrot-haunted woods,
    Crisp coral reefs and blue shark-finned lagoons
    Fringed with the creaming foam, mile upon mile
    Of mystery. Dream after dream went by,
    Colouring the brown air of that London night
    With many a mad miraculous romance.

    There, suddenly, some augury, some flash
    Showed him a coming promise, a strange hint,
    Which, though he played with it, he scarce believed;
    Strange as in some dark cave the first fierce gleam
    Of pirate gold to some forlorn maroon
    Who tiptoes to the heap and glances round
    Askance, and dreads to hear what erst he longed
    To hear--some voice to break the hush; but bathes
    Both hands with childish laughter in the gold,
    And lets it trickle through his fevered palms,
    And begins counting half a hundred times
    And loses count each time for sheer delight
    And wonder in it; meantime, if he knew,
    Passing the cave-mouth, far away, beyond
    The still lagoon, the coral reef, the foam
    And the white fluttering chatter of the birds,
    A sail that might have saved him comes and goes
    Unseen across the blue Pacific sea.
    So Drake, too, played with fancies; but that sail
    Passed not unseen, for suddenly there came
    A firm and heavy footstep to the door,
    Then a loud knocking: and, at first, he thought
    "I am a dead man: there is peace with Spain,
    And they are come to lead me to my doom."
    But, as he looked across one shoulder, pride
    Checking the fuller watch for what he feared,
    The door opened; and cold as from the sea
    The night rushed in, and there against the gloom,
    Clad, as it seemed, with wind and cloud and rain,
    There loomed a stately form and high grim face
    Loaded with deadly thoughts of iron war--
    Walsingham,--in one hand he held a map
    Marked with red lines; the other hand held down
    The rich encrusted hilt of his great sword.
    Then Drake rose, and the other cautiously
    Closing the door drew near the flickering light
    And spread his map out on the table, saying--
    "Mark for me here the points whereat the King
    Philip of Spain may best be wounded, mark
    The joints of his harness;" and Drake looked at him
    Thinking, "If he betray me, I am dead."

    But the soldier met his eyes and, with a laugh,
    Drake, quivering like a bloodhound in the leash,
    Stooped, with his finger pointing thus and thus--
    "Here would I guard, here would I lie in wait,
    Here would I strike him through the breast and throat."
    And as he spoke he kindled, and began
    To set forth his great dreams, and high romance
    Rose like a moon reflecting the true sun
    Unseen; and as the full round moon indeed
    Rising behind a mighty mountain-chain
    Will shadow forth in outline grim and black
    Its vast and ragged edges, so that moon
    Of high romance rose greatly shadowing forth
    The grandeur of his dreams, until their might
    Dawned upon Walsingham, and he, too, saw
    For a moment of muffled moonlight and wild cloud
    The vision of the imperious years to be!
    But suddenly Drake paused as one who strays
    Beyond the bounds of caution, paused and cursed
    His tongue for prating like a moon-struck boy's.
    "I am mad," he cried, "I am mad to babble so!"
    Then Walsingham drew near him with strange eyes
    And muttered slowly, "Write that madness down;
    Ay, write it down, that madman's plan of thine;
    Sign it, and let me take it to the Queen."
    But the weather-wiser seaman warily
    Answered him, "If it please Almighty God
    To take away our Queen Elizabeth,
    Seeing that she is mortal as ourselves,
    England might then be leagued with Spain, and I
    Should here have sealed my doom. I will not put
    My pen to paper."
                       So, across the charts
    With that dim light on each grim countenance
    The seaman and the courtier subtly fenced
    With words and thoughts, but neither would betray
    His whole heart to the other. At the last
    Walsingham gripped the hand of Francis Drake
    And left him wondering.

                             On the third night came
    A messenger from Walsingham who bade
    Drake to the Palace where, without one word,
    The statesman met him in an anteroom
    And led him, with flushed cheek and beating heart,
    Along a mighty gold-gloomed corridor
    Into a high-arched chamber, hung with tall
    Curtains of gold-fringed silk and tapestries
    From Flanders looms, whereon were flowers and beasts
    And forest-work, great knights, with hawk on hand,
    Riding for ever on their glimmering steeds
    Through bowery glades to some immortal face
    Beyond the fairy fringes of the world.
    A silver lamp swung softly overhead,
    Fed with some perfumed oil that shed abroad
    Delicious light and fragrances as rare
    As those that stirred faint wings at eventide
    Through the King's House in Lebanon of old.
    Into a quietness as of fallen bloom
    Their feet sank in that chamber; and, all round,
    Soft hills of Moorish cushions dimly drowsed
    On glimmering crimson couches. Near the lamp
    An ebony chess-board stood inlaid with squares
    Of ruby and emerald, garnished with cinquefoils
    Of silver, bears and ragged staves; the men,
    Likewise of precious stones, were all arrayed--
    Bishops and knights and elephants and pawns--
    As for a game. Sixteen of them were set
    In silver white, the other sixteen gilt.
    Now, as Drake gazed upon an arras, nigh
    The farther doors, whereon was richly wrought
    The picture of that grave and lovely queen
    Penelope, with cold hands weaving still
    The unending web, while in an outer court
    The broad-limbed wooers basking in the sun
    On purple fleeces took from white-armed girls,
    Up-kirtled to the knee, the crimson wine;
    There, as he gazed and thought, "Is this not like
    Our Queen Elizabeth who waits and weaves,
    Penelope of England, her dark web
    Unendingly till England's Empire come;"
    There, as he gazed, for a moment, he could vow
    The pictured arras moved. Well had it been
    Had he drawn sword and pierced it through and through;
    But he suspected nothing and said nought
    To Walsingham; for thereupon they heard
    The sound of a low lute and a sweet voice
    Carolling like a gold-caged nightingale,
    Caught by the fowlers ere he found his mate,
    And singing all his heart out evermore
    To the unknown forest-love he ne'er should see.
    And Walsingham smiled sadly to himself,
    Knowing the weary queen had bidden some maid
    Sing to her, even as David sang to Saul;
    Since all her heart was bitter with her love
    Or so it was breathed (and there the chess-board stood,
    Her love's device upon it), though she still,
    For England's sake, must keep great foreign kings
    Her suitors, wedding no man till she died.
    Nor did she know how, in her happiest hour
    Remembered now most sorrowfully, the moon,
    Vicegerent of the sky, through summer dews,
    As that sweet ballad tells in plaintive rhyme,
    Silvering the grey old Cumnor towers and all
    The hollow haunted oaks that grew thereby,
    Gleamed on a casement whence the pure white face
    Of Amy Robsart, wife of Leicester, wife
    Unknown of the Queen's lover, a frail bar
    To that proud Earl's ambition, quietly gazed
    And heard the night-owl hoot a dark presage
    Of murder through her timid shuddering heart.
    But of that deed Elizabeth knew nought;
    Nay, white as Amy Robsart in her dream
    Of love she listened to the sobbing lute,
    Bitterly happy, proudly desolate;
    So heavy are all earth's crowns and sharp with thorns!
    But tenderly that high-born maiden sang.


SONG

    _Now the purple night is past,
      Now the moon more faintly glows,
    Dawn has through thy casement cast
      Roses on thy breast, a rose;
    Now the kisses are all done,
      Now the world awakes anew,
    Now the charmed hour is gone,
      Let not love go, too._

    _When old winter, creeping nigh,
      Sprinkles raven hair with white,
    Dims the brightly glancing eye,
      Laughs away the dancing light,
    Roses may forget their sun,
      Lilies may forget their dew,
    Beauties perish, one by one,
      Let not love go, too._

    _Palaces and towers of pride
      Crumble year by year away;
    Creeds like robes are laid aside,
      Even our very tombs decay!
    When the all-conquering moth and rust
      Gnaw the goodly garment through,
    When the dust returns to dust,
      Let not love go, too._

    _Kingdoms melt away like snow,
      Gods are spent like wasting flames,
    Hardly the new peoples know
      Their divine thrice-worshipped names!
    At the last great hour of all,
      When thou makest all things new,
    Father, hear Thy children call,
      Let not love go, too._

    The song ceased: all was still; and now it seemed
    Power brooded on the silence, and Drake saw
    A woman come to meet him,--tall and pale
    And proud she seemed: behind her head two wings
    As of some mighty phantom butterfly
    Glimmered with jewel-sparks in the gold gloom.
    Her small, pure, grey-eyed face above her ruff
    Was chiselled like an agate; and he knew
    It was the Queen. Low bent he o'er her hand;
    And "Ah," she said, "Sir Francis Walsingham
    Hath told me what an English heart beats here!
    Know you what injuries the King of Spain
    Hath done us?" Drake looked up at her: she smiled,
    "We find you apt! Will you not be our knight
    For we are helpless"--witchingly she smiled--
    "We are not ripe for war; our policy
    Must still be to uphold the velvet cloak
    Of peace; but I would have it mask the hand
    That holds the dagger! Will you not unfold
    Your scheme to us?" And then with a low bow
    Walsingham, at a signal from the Queen,
    Withdrew; and she looked down at Drake and smiled;
    And in his great simplicity the man
    Spake all his heart out like some youthful knight
    Before his Gloriana: his heart burned,
    Knowing he talked with England, face to face;
    And suddenly the Queen bent down to him,
    England bent down to him, and his heart reeled
    With the beauty of her presence--for indeed
    Women alone have royal power like this
    Within their very selves enthroned and shrined
    To draw men's hearts out! Royal she bent down
    And touched his hand for a moment. "Friend," she said,
    Looking into his face with subtle eyes,
    "I have searched thy soul to-night and know full well
    How I can trust thee! Canst thou think that I,
    The daughter of my royal father, lack
    The fire which every boor in England feels
    Burning within him as the bloody score
    Which Spain writes on the flesh of Englishmen
    Mounts higher day by day? Am I not Tudor?
    I am not deaf or blind; nor yet a king!
    I am a woman and a queen, and where
    Kings would have plunged into their red revenge
    Or set their throne up on this temporal shore,
    As flatterers bade that wiser king Canúte,
    Thence to command the advancing tides of battle
    Till one ensanguined sea whelm throne and king
    And kingdom, friend, I take my woman's way,
    Smile in mine enemies' faces with a heart
    All hell, and undermine them hour by hour!
    This island scarce can fend herself from France,
    And now Spain holds the keys of all the world,
    How should we fight her, save that my poor wit
    Hath won the key to Philip? Oh, I know
    His treacherous lecherous heart, and hour by hour
    My nets are drawing round him. I, that starve
    My public armies, feed his private foes,
    Nourish his rebels in the Netherlands,
    Nay, sacrifice mine own poor woman's heart
    To keep him mine, and surely now stands Fate
    With hand uplifted by the doors of Spain
    Ready to knock: the time is close at hand
    When I shall strike, once, and no second stroke.
    Remember, friend, though kings have fought for her,
    This England, with the trident in her grasp,
    Was ever woman; and she waits her throne;
    And thou canst speed it. Furnish thee with ships,
    Gather thy gentleman adventurers,
    And be assured thy parsimonious queen--
    Oh ay, she knows that chattering of the world--
    Will find thee wealth enough. Then put to sea,
    Fly the black flag of piracy awhile
    Against these blackest foes of all mankind.
    Nay; what hast thou to do with piracy?
    _Hostis humani generis_ indeed
    Is Spain: she dwells beyond the bounds of law;
    Thine is no piracy, whate'er men say,
    Thou art a knight on Gloriana's quest.
    Oh, lay that golden unction to thy soul,
    This is no piracy, but glorious war,
    Waged for thy country and for all mankind,
    Therefore put out to sea without one fear,
    Ransack their El Dorados of the West,
    Pillage their golden galleons, sap their strength
    Even at its utmost fountains; let them know
    That there is blood, not water, in our veins.
    Sail on, my captain, to the glorious end,
    And, though at first thou needs must sail alone
    And undefended, ere that end be reached,
    When I shall give the word, nay, but one word,
    All England shall be up and after thee,
    The sword of England shall shine over thee,
    And round about thee like a guardian fire;
    All the great soul of England shall be there;
    Her mighty dead shall at that cry of doom
    Rise from their graves and in God's panoply
    Plunge with our standards through immortal storms
    When Drake rides out across the wreck of Rome.
    As yet we must be cautious; let no breath
    Escape thee, save to thy most trusted friends;
    For now, if my lord Burleigh heard one word
    Of all thou hast in mind, he is so much
    The friend of caution and the beaten road,
    He would not rest till he had spilled thy hopes
    And sealed thy doom! Go now, fit out thy ships.
    Walsingham is empowered to give thee gold
    Immediately, but look to him for more
    As thou shalt need it, gold and gold to spare,
    My golden-hearted pilot to the shores
    Of victory--so farewell;" and through the gloom
    She vanished as she came; and Drake groped, dazed,
    Out through the doors, and found great Walsingham
    Awaiting him with gold.
                             But in the room
    Where Drake had held his converse with the Queen
    The embroidered arras moved, and a lean face,
    White with its long eavesdropping upon death,
    Crept out and peered as a venomous adder peers
    From out dark ferns, then as the reptile flashes
    Along a path between two banks of flowers
    Almost too swift for sight, a stealthy form
    --One of the fifty spies whom Burleigh paid--
    Passed down the gold-gloomed corridor to seek
    His master, whom among great books he found,
    Calm, like a mountain brooding o'er the sea.
    Nor did he break that calm for all these winds
    Of rumour that now burst from out the sky.
    His brow bent like a cliff over his thoughts,
    And the spy watched him half resentfully,
    Thinking his news well worth a blacker frown.
    At last the statesman smiled and answered, "Go;
    Fetch Thomas Doughty, Leicester's secretary."

    Few suns had risen and set ere Francis Drake
    Had furnished forth his ships with guns and men,
    Tried seamen that he knew in storms of old,--
    Will Harvest, who could haul the ropes and fight
    All day, and sing a foc'sle song to cheer
    Sea-weary hearts at night; brave old Tom Moone
    The carpenter, whose faithful soul looked up
    To Drake's large mastery with a mastiff's eyes;
    And three-score trusty mariners, all scarred
    And weather-beaten. After these there came
    Some two-score gentleman adventurers,
    Gay college lads or lawyers that had grown
    Sick of the dusty Temple, and were fired
    With tales of the rich Indies and those tall
    Enchanted galleons drifting through the West,
    Laden with ingots and broad bars of gold.
    Already some had bought at a great price
    Green birds of Guatemala, which they wore
    On their slouched hats, tasting the high romance
    And new-found colours of the world like wine.
    By night they gathered in a marvellous inn
    Beside the black and secret flowing Thames;
    And joyously they tossed the magic phrase
    "Pieces of eight" from mouth to mouth, and laughed
    And held the red wine up, night after night,
    Around their tables, toasting Francis Drake.
    Among these came a courtier, and none knew
    Or asked by whose approval, for each thought
    Some other brought him; yet he made his way
    Cautiously, being a man with a smooth tongue,
    The secretary of Leicester; and his name
    Was Thomas Doughty. Most of all with Drake
    He won his way to friendship, till at last
    There seemed one heart between them and one soul.


BOOK II

    So on a misty grey December morn
    Five ships put out from calm old Plymouth Sound;
    Five little ships, the largest not so large
    As many a coasting yacht or fishing-trawl
    To-day; yet these must brave uncharted seas
    Of unimagined terrors, haunted glooms,
    And shadowy horrors of an unknown world
    Wild as primeval chaos. In the first,
    The _Golden Hynde_, a ship of eighteen guns,
    Drake sailed: John Wynter, a queen's captain, next
    Brought out the _Elizabeth_, a stout new ship
    Of sixteen guns. The pinnace _Christopher_
    Came next, in staunch command of old Tom Moone
    Who, five years back, with reeking powder grimed,
    Off Cartagena fought against the stars
    All night, and, as the sun arose in blood,
    Knee-deep in blood and brine, stood in the dark
    Perilous hold and scuttled his own ship
    The _Swan_, bidding her down to God's great deep
    Rather than yield her up a prize to Spain.
    Lastly two gentleman-adventurers
    Brought out the new _Swan_ and the _Marygold_.
    Their crews, all told, were eight score men and boys.
    Not only terrors of the deep they braved,
    Bodiless witchcrafts of the black abyss,
    Red gaping mouths of hell and gulfs of fire
    That yawned for all who passed the tropic line;
    But death lurked round them from their setting forth.
    Mendoza, plenipotentiary of Spain,
    By spies informed, had swiftly warned his king,
    Who sent out mandates through his huge empire
    From Gaudalchiber to the golden West
    For the instant sinking of all English ships
    And the instant execution of their crews
    Who durst appear in the Caribbean sea.
    Moreover, in the pith of their emprise
    A peril lurked--Burleigh's emissaries,
    The smooth-tongued Thomas Doughty, who had brought
    His brother--unacquitted of that charge
    Of poisoning, raised against him by the friends
    Of Essex, but in luckless time released
    Lately for lack of proof, on no strong plea.
    These two wound through them like two snakes at ease
    In Eden, waiting for their venomous hour.
    Especially did Thomas Doughty toil
    With soft and flowery tongue to win his way;
    And Drake, whose rich imagination craved
    For something more than simple seaman's talk,
    Was marvellously drawn to this new friend
    Who with the scholar's mind, the courtier's gloss,
    The lawyer's wit, the adventurer's romance,
    Gold honey from the blooms of Euphues,
    Rare flashes from the _Mermaid_ and sweet smiles
    Copied from Sidney's self, even to the glance
    Of sudden, liquid sympathy, gave Drake
    That banquet of the soul he ne'er had known
    Nor needed till he knew, but needed now.
    So to the light of Doughty's answering eyes
    He poured his inmost thoughts out, hour by hour;
    And Doughty coiled up in the heart of Drake.

    Against such odds the tiny fleet set sail;
    Yet gallantly and with heroic pride,
    Escutcheoned pavisades, emblazoned poops,
    Banners and painted shields and close-fights hung
    With scarlet broideries. Every polished gun
    Grinned through the jaws of some heraldic beast,
    Gilded and carven and gleaming with all hues;
    While in the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_
    Rich perfumes floated, given by the great Queen
    Herself to Drake as Captain-General;
    So that it seemed her soul was with the fleet,
    A presence to remind him, far away,
    Of how he talked with England, face to face,--
    No pirate he, but Gloriana's knight.
    Silver and gold his table furniture,
    Engraved and richly chased, lavishly gleamed
    While, fanned by favouring airs, the ships advanced
    With streaming flags and ensigns and sweet chords
    Of music struck by skilled musicians
    Whom Drake brought with him, not from vanity,
    But knowing how the pulse of men beats high
    To music; and the hearts of men like these
    Were open to the high romance of earth,
    And they that dwelt so near God's mystery
    Were proud of their own manhood. They went out
    To danger, as to a sweetheart, far away.

    Light as the sea-birds dipping their white wings
    In foam before the gently heaving prows
    Each heart beat, while the low soft lapping splash
    Of water racing past them ripped and tore
    Whiter and faster, and the bellying sails
    Filled out, and the chalk cliffs of England sank
    Dwindling behind the broad grey plains of sea.
    Meekly content and tamely stay-at-home
    The sea-birds seemed that piped across the waves;
    And Drake, be-mused, leaned smiling to his friend
    Doughty and said, "Is it not strange to know
    When we return yon speckled herring-gulls
    Will still be wheeling, dipping, flashing there?
    We shall not find a fairer land afar
    Than those thyme-scented hills we leave behind!
    Soon the young lambs will bleat across the combes,
    And breezes will bring puffs of hawthorn scent
    Down Devon lanes; over the purple moors
    Lavrocks will carol; and on the village greens
    Around the May-pole, while the moon hangs low,
    The boys and girls of England merrily swing
    In country footing through the morrice dance.
    But many of us indeed shall not return."
    Then the other with a laugh, "Nay, like the man
    Who slept a hundred years we shall return
    And find our England strange: there are great storms
    Brewing; God only knows what we shall find--
    Perchance a Spanish king upon the throne!
    What then?" And Drake, "I should put down my helm,
    And out once more to the unknown golden West
    To die, as I have lived, in a free land."
    So said he, while the white cliffs dwindled down,
    Faded, and vanished; but the prosperous wind
    Carried the five ships onward over the swell
    Of swinging, sweeping seas, till the sun sank,
    And height o'er height the chaos of the skies
    Broke out into the miracle of the stars.
    Frostily glittering, all the Milky Way
    Lay bare like diamond-dust upon the robe
    Of some great king. Orion and the Plough
    Glimmered through drifting gulfs of silver fleece,
    And, far away, in Italy, that night
    Young Galileo, looking upward, heard
    The self-same whisper through that wild abyss
    Which now called Drake out to the unknown West.
    But, after supper, Drake came up on deck
    With Doughty, and on the cold poop as they leaned
    And gazed across the rolling gleam and gloom
    Of mighty muffled seas, began to give
    Voices to those lovely captives of the brain
    Which, like princesses in some forest-tower,
    Still yearn for the delivering prince, the sweet
    Far bugle-note that calls from answering minds.
    He told him how, in those dark days which now
    Seemed like an evil dream, when the Princess
    Elizabeth even trembled for her life
    And read there, by the gleam of Smithfield fires,
    Those cunning lessons of diplomacy
    Which saved her then and now for England's sake,
    He passed his youth. 'Twas when the power of Spain
    Began to light the gloom, with that great glare
    Of martyrdom which, while the stars endure,
    Bears witness how men overcame the world,
    Trod the red flames beneath their feet like flowers,
    And cast aside the blackening robe of flesh,
    While with a crown of joy upon their heads,
    Even as into a palace, they passed through
    The portals of the tomb to prove their love
    Stronger at least than death: and, in those days
    A Puritan, with iron in his soul,
    Having in earlier manhood occupied
    His business in great waters and beheld
    The bloody cowls of the Inquisition pass
    Before the midnight moon as he kept watch;
    And having then forsworn the steely sea
    To dwell at home in England with his love
    At Tavistock in Devon, Edmund Drake
    Began, albeit too near the Abbey walls,
    To speak too staunchly for his ancient faith;
    And with his young child Francis, had to flee
    By night at last for shelter to the coast.
    Little the boy remembered of that flight,
    Pillioned behind his father, save the clang
    And clatter of the hoofs on stony ground
    Striking a sharp blue fire, while country tales
    Of highwaymen kindled his reckless heart
    As the great steed went shouldering through the night.
    There Francis, laying a little sunburnt hand
    On the big bolstered pistol at each side,
    Dreamed with his wide grey eyes that he himself
    Was riding out on some freebooting quest,
    And felt himself heroic. League by league
    The magic world rolled past him as they rode,
    Leaving him nothing but a memory
    Of his own making. Vaguely he perceived
    A thousand meadows darkly streaming by
    With clouds of perfume from their secret flowers,
    A wayside cottage-window pointing out
    A golden finger o'er the purple road;
    A puff of garden roses or a waft
    Of honeysuckle blown along a wood,
    While overhead that silver ship, the moon,
    Sailed slowly down the gulfs of glittering stars,
    Till, at the last, a buffet of fresh wind
    Fierce with sharp savours of the stinging brine
    Against his dreaming face brought up a roar
    Of mystic welcome from the Channel seas.
    And there Drake paused for a moment, as a song
    Stole o'er the waters from the _Marygold_
    Where some musician, striking luscious chords
    Of sweet-stringed music, freed his heart's desire
    In symbols of the moment, which the rest,
    And Doughty among them, scarce could understand.


SONG

    _The moon is up: the stars are bright:
      The wind is fresh and free!
    We're out to seek for gold to-night
      Across the silver sea!
    The world was growing grey and old;
      Break out the sails again!
    We're out to seek a Realm of Gold
      Beyond the Spanish Main._

    _We're sick of all the cringing knees,
      The courtly smiles and lies.
    God, let Thy singing Channel breeze
      Lighten our hearts and eyes!
    Let love no more be bought and sold
      For earthly loss or gain.
    We're out to seek an Age of Gold
      Beyond the Spanish Main._

    _Beyond the light of far Cathay,
      Beyond all mortal dreams,
    Beyond the reach of night and day
      Our El Dorado gleams,
    Revealing--as the skies unfold--
      A star without a stain,
    The Glory of the Gates of Gold
      Beyond the Spanish Main._

    And, as the skilled musician made the words
    Of momentary meaning still simply
    His own eternal hope and heart's desire,
    Without belief, perchance, in Drake's own quest--
    To Drake's own greater mind the eternal glory
    Seemed to transfigure his immediate hope.
    But Doughty only heard a sweet concourse
    Of sounds. They ceased. And Drake resumed his tale
    Of that strange flight in boyhood to the sea.
    Next, the red-curtained inn and kindly hands
    Of Protestant Plymouth held his memory long;
    Often in strange and distant dreams he saw
    That scene which now he tenderly portrayed
    To Doughty's half-ironic smiling lips,
    Half-sympathetic eyes; he saw again
    That small inn parlour with the homely fare
    Set forth upon the table, saw the gang
    Of seamen dripping from the spray come in,
    Like great new thoughts to some adventurous brain.
    Feeding his wide grey eyes he saw them stand
    Around the crimson fire and stamp their feet
    And scatter the salt drops from their big sea-boots;
    And all that night he lay awake and heard
    Mysterious thunderings of eternal tides
    Moaning out of a cold and houseless gloom
    Beyond the world, that made it seem most sweet
    To slumber in a little four-walled inn
    Immune from all that vastness. But at dawn
    He woke, he leapt from bed, he ran and lookt,
    There, through the tiny high bright casement, there,--
    O, fairy vision of that small boy's face
    Peeping at daybreak through the diamond pane!--
    There first he saw the wondrous new-born world,
    And round its princely shoulders wildly flowing,
    Gemmed with a myriad clusters of the sun,
    The magic azure mantle of the sea.

    And, afterwards, there came those marvellous days
    When, on that battleship, a disused hulk
    Rotting to death in Chatham Reach, they found
    Sanctuary and a dwelling-place at last.
    For, Hawkins, that great ship-man, being their friend,
    A Protestant, with power on Plymouth town,
    Nigh half whereof he owned, made Edmund Drake
    Reader of prayer to all the ships of war
    That lay therein. So there the dreaming boy,
    Francis, grew up in that grim nursery
    Among the ropes and masts and great dumb mouths
    Of idle ordnance. In that hulk he heard
    Many a time his father and his friends
    Over some wild-eyed troop of refugees
    Thunder against the powers of Spain and Rome,
    "Idolaters who defiled the House of God
    In England;" and all round them, as he heard,
    The clang and clatter of shipwright hammers rang,
    And hour by hour upon his vision rose,
    In solid oak reality, new ships,
    As Ilion rose to music, ships of war,
    The visible shapes and symbols of his dream,
    Unconscious yet, but growing as they grew,
    A wondrous incarnation, hour by hour,
    Till with their towering masts they stood complete,
    Embodied thoughts, in God's own dockyards built,
    For Drake ere long to lead against the world.

    There, as to round the tale with ringing gold,
    Across the waters from the full-plumed _Swan_
    The music of a _Mermaid_ roundelay--
    _Our Lady of the Sea_, a Dorian theme
    Tuned to the soul of England--charmed the moon.


SONG


    I

    Queen Venus wandered away with a cry,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    For the purple wound in Adon's thigh;
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;
    With a bitter farewell from sky to sky,
            And a moan, a moan, from sea to sea;
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    II

    The soft Ægean heard her sigh,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    Heard the Spartan hills reply,
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;
    Spain was aware of her drawing nigh
            Foot-gilt from the blossoms of Italy;
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    III

    In France they heard her voice go by,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_
    --And on the May-wind droop and die,
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;
    Your maidens choose their loves, but I--
            White as I came from the foam-white sea,
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--


    IV

    The warm red-meal-winged butterfly,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    Beat on her breast in the golden rye,--
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me,--
    Stained her breast with a dusty dye
            Red as the print of a kiss might be!
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    V

    Is there no land, afar or nigh--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_--
    But dreads the kiss o' the sea? Ah, why--
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me!--
    Why will ye cling to the loves that die?
            Is earth all Adon to my plea?
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    VI

    Under the warm blue summer sky,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_
    With outstretched arms and a low long sigh,--
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me;--
    Over the Channel they saw her fly
            To the white-cliffed island that crowns the sea,
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_


    VII

    England laughed as her queen drew nigh,--
            _N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_
    To the white-walled cottages gleaming high,
            _Je vous en prie_, pity me!
    They drew her in with a joyful cry
            To the hearth where she sits with a babe on her knee,
    She has turned her moan to a lullaby.
            She is nursing a son to the kings of the sea,
    _N'oserez vous, mon bel, mon bel,
            N'oserez vous, mon bel ami?_

    Such memories, on the plunging _Golden Hynde_,
    Under the stars, Drake drew before his friend,
    Clomb for a moment to that peak of vision,
    That purple peak of Darien, laughing aloud
    O'er those wild exploits down to Rio Grande
    Which even now had made his fierce renown
    Terrible to all lonely ships of Spain.
    E'en now, indeed, that poet of Portugal,
    Lope de Vega, filled with this new fear
    Began to meditate his epic muse
    Till, like a cry of panic from his lips,
    He shrilled the faint _Dragontea_ forth, wherein
    Drake is that Dragon of the Apocalypse,
    The dread Antagonist of God and Man.

    Well had it been for Doughty on that night
    Had he not heard what followed; for, indeed,
    When two minds clash, not often does the less
    Conquer the greater; but, without one thought
    Of evil, seeing they now were safe at sea,
    Drake told him, only somewhat, yet too much,
    Of that close conference with the Queen. And lo,
    The face of Doughty blanched with a slow thought
    That crept like a cold worm through all his brain,
    "Thus much I knew, though secretly, before;
    But here he freely tells me as his friend;
    If I be false and he be what they say,
    His knowledge of my knowledge will mean death."
    But Drake looked round at Doughty with a smile
    And said, "Forgive me now: thou art not used
    To these cold nights at sea! thou tremblest, friend;
    Let us go down and drink a cup of sack
    To our return!" And at that kindly smile
    Doughty shook off his nightmare mood, and thought,
    "The yard-arm is for dogs, not gentlemen!
    Even Drake would not misuse a man of birth!"
    And in the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_
    Revolving subtle treacheries he sat.
    There with the sugared phrases of the court
    Bartering beads for gold, he drew out all
    The simple Devon seaman's inmost heart,
    And coiled up in the soul of Francis Drake.
    There in the solemn night they interchanged
    Lies for sweet confidences. From one wall
    The picture of Drake's love looked down on him;
    And, like a bashful schoolboy's, that bronzed face
    Flushed as he blurted out with brightening eyes
    And quickening breath how he had seen her first,
    Crowned on the village green, a Queen of May.
    Her name, too, was Elizabeth, he said,
    As if it proved that she, too, was a queen,
    Though crowned with milk-white Devon may alone,
    And queen but of one plot of meadow-sweet.
    As yet, he said, he had only kissed her hand,
    Smiled in her eyes and--there Drake also flinched,
    Thinking, "I ne'er may see her face again."

    And Doughty comforted his own dark heart
    Thinking, "I need not fear so soft a soul
    As this"; and yet, he wondered how the man,
    Seeing his love so gripped him, none the less
    Could leave her, thus to follow after dreams;
    For faith to Doughty was an unknown word,
    And trustfulness the property of fools.
    At length they parted, each to his own couch,
    Doughty with half a chuckle, Francis Drake
    With one old-fashioned richly grateful prayer
    Blessing all those he loved, as he had learnt
    Beside his mother's knee in Devon days.

    So all night long they sailed; but when a rift
    Of orchard crimson broke the yellowing gloom
    And barred the closely clouded East with dawn,
    Behold, a giant galleon, overhead,
    Lifting its huge black shining sides on high,
    Loomed like some misty monster of the deep:
    And, sullenly rolling out great gorgeous folds,
    Over her rumbled like a thunder-cloud
    The heavy flag of Spain. The splendid poop,
    Mistily lustrous as a dragon's hoard
    Seen in some magic cave-mouth o'er the sea
    Through shimmering April sunlight after rain,
    Blazed to the morning; and her port-holes grinned
    With row on row of cannon. There at once
    One sharp shrill whistle sounded, and those five
    Small ships, mere minnows clinging to the flanks
    Of that Leviathan, unseen, unheard,
    Undreamt of, grappled her. She seemed asleep,
    Swinging at ease with great half-slackened sails,
    Majestically careless of the dawn.
    There in the very native seas of Spain,
    There with the yeast and foam of her proud cliffs,
    Her own blue coasts, in sight across the waves,
    Up her Titanic sides without a sound
    The naked-footed British seamen swarmed
    With knives between their teeth: then on her decks
    They dropped like panthers, and the softly fierce
    Black-bearded watch, of Spaniards, all amazed,
    Rubbing their eyes as if at a wild dream,
    Upraised a sudden shout, _El Draque! El Draque!_
    And flashed their weapons out, but all too late;
    For, ere their sleeping comrades reached the deck,
    The little watch, out-numbered and out-matched,
    Lay bound, and o'er the hatches everywhere
    The points of naked cutlasses on guard
    Gleamed, and without a struggle those below
    Gave up their arms, their poignards jewelled thick
    With rubies, and their blades of Spanish steel.

    Then onward o'er the great grey gleaming sea
    They swept with their rich booty, night and day.
    Five other prizes, one for every ship,
    Out of the seas of Spain they suddenly caught
    And carried with them, laughing as they went--
    "Now, now indeed the Rubicon is crossed;
    Now have we singed the eyelids and the beard
    Of Spain; now have we roused the hornet's nest;
    Now shall we sail against a world in arms;
    Now we have nought between us and black death
    But our own hands, five ships, and three score guns."
    So laughed they, plunging through the bay of storms,
    Biscay, and past Gibraltar, not yet clothed
    With British thunder, though, as one might dream,
    Gazing in dim prophetic grandeur out
    Across the waves while that small fleet went by,
    Or watching them with love's most wistful fear
    As they plunged Southward to the lonely coasts
    Of Africa, till right in front up-soared,
    Tremendous over ocean, Teneriffe,
    Cloud-robed, but crowned with colours of the dawn.

    Already those two traitors were at work,
    Doughty and his false brother, among the crews,
    Who knew not yet the vastness of their quest,
    Nor dreamed of aught beyond the accustomed world;
    For Drake had kept it secret, and the thoughts
    Of some that he had shipped before the mast
    Set sail scarce farther than for Mogadore
    In West Morocco, or at the utmost mark
    For northern Egypt, by the midnight woods
    And crystal palace roofed with chrysoprase
    Where Prester John had reigned five hundred years,
    And Sydon, river of jewels, through the dark
    Enchanted gorges rolled its rays along!
    Some thought of Rio Grande; but scarce to ten
    The true intent was known; while to divert
    The rest from care the skilled musicians played.
    But those two Doughtys cunningly devised
    By chance-dropt words to breathe a hint abroad;
    And through the foc'sles crept a grisly fear
    Of things that lay beyond the bourne of earth,
    Till even those hardy seamen almost quailed;
    And now, at any whisper, they might turn
    With terror in their eyes. They might refuse
    To sail into that fabled burning Void
    Or brave that _primum mobile_ which drew
    O'er-daring ships into the jaws of hell
    Beyond the Pole Antarticke, where the sea
    Rushed down through fiery mountains, and no sail
    Could e'er return against its roaring stream.

    Now down the coast of Barbary they cruised
    Till Christmas Eve embraced them in the heart
    Of summer. In a bay of mellow calm
    They moored, and as the fragrant twilight brought
    The stars, the sound of song and dance arose;
    And down the shores in stealthy silence crept,
    Out of the massy forest's emerald gloom,
    The naked, dark-limbed children of the night,
    Unseen, to gaze upon the floating glare
    Of revelry; unheard, to hear that strange
    New music of the gods, where o'er the soft
    Ripple and wash of the lanthorn-crimsoned tide
    Will Harvest's voice above the chorus rang.


SONG

    _In Devonshire, now, the Christmas chime
        Is carolling over the lea;
    And the sexton shovels away the snow
        From the old church porch, maybe;
    And the waifs with their lanthorns and noses a-glow
        Come round for their Christmas fee;
    But, as in old England it's Christmas-time,
        Why, so is it here at sea,
          My lads,
        Why, so is it here at sea!_

    _When the ship comes home, from turret to poop
        Filled full with Spanish gold,
    There'll be many a country dance and joke,
        And many a tale to be told;
    Every old woman shall have a red cloak
        To fend her against the cold;
    And every old man shall have a big round stoup
        Of jolly good ale and old,
          My lads,
        Jolly good ale and old!_

    But on the morrow came a prosperous wind
    Whereof they took advantage, and shook out
    The flashing sails, and held their Christmas feast
    Upon the swirling ridges of the sea:
    And, sweeping Southward with full many a rouse
    And shout of laughter, at the fall of day,
    While the black prows drove, leapt, and plunged, and ploughed
    Through the broad dazzle of sunset-coloured tides,
    Outside the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_,
    Where Drake and his chief captains dined in state,
    The skilled musicians made a great new song.


SONG


    I

    _Happy by the hearth sit the lasses and the lads, now,
      Roasting of their chestnuts, toasting of their toes!
    When the door is opened to a blithe new-comer,
      Stamping like a ploughman to shuffle off the snows;
    Rosy flower-like faces through the soft red firelight
      Float as if to greet us, far away at sea,
    Sigh as they remember, and turn the sigh to laughter,
      Kiss beneath the mistletoe and wonder at their glee.
            With their "heigh ho, the holly!
            This life is most jolly!"
          Christmas-time is kissing-time,
            Away with melancholy!_


    II

    _Ah, the Yule of England, the happy Yule of England,
      Yule of berried holly and the merry mistletoe;
    The boar's head, the brown ale, the blue snapdragon,
      Yule of groaning tables and the crimson log aglow!
    Yule, the golden bugle to the scattered old companions,
      Ringing as with laughter, shining as through tears!
    Loved of little children, oh guard the holy Yuletide.
      Guard it, men of England, for the child beyond the years.
            With its "heigh ho, the holly!"
            Away with melancholy!
          Christmas-time is kissing-time,
            "This life is most jolly!_"

    Now to the Fortunate Islands of old time
    They came, and found no glory as of old
    Encircling them, no red ineffable calm
    Of sunset round crowned faces pale with bliss
    Like evening stars. Rugged and desolate
    Those isles were when they neared them, though afar
    They beautifully smouldered in the sun
    Like dusky purple jewels fringed and frayed
    With silver foam across that ancient sea.
    Of wonder. On the largest of the seven
    Drake landed Doughty with his musketeers
    To exercise their weapons and to seek
    Supplies among the matted uncouth huts
    Which, as the ships drew round each ragged cliff,
    Crept like remembered misery into sight;
    Oh, like the strange dull waking from a dream
    They blotted out the rosy courts and fair
    Imagined marble thresholds of the King
    Achilles and the heroes that were gone.
    But Drake cared nought for these things. Such a heart
    He had, to make each utmost ancient bourne
    Of man's imagination but a point
    Of new departure for his Golden Dream.
    But Doughty with his men ashore, alone,
    Among the sparse wind-bitten groves of palm,
    Kindled their fears of all they must endure
    On that immense adventure. Nay, sometimes
    He hinted of a voyage far beyond
    All history and fable, far beyond
    Even that Void whence only two returned,--
    Columbus, with his men in mutiny;
    Magellan, who could only hound his crew
    Onward by threats of death, until they turned
    In horror from the Threat that lay before,
    Preferring to be hanged as mutineers
    Rather than venture farther. Nor indeed
    Did even Magellan at the last return;
    But, with all hell around him, in the clutch
    Of devils died upon some savage isle
    By poisonous black enchantment. Not in vain
    Were Doughty's words on that volcanic shore
    Among the stunted dark acacia trees,
    Whose heads, all bent one way by the trade-wind,
    Pointed North-east by North, South-west by West
    Ambiguous sibyls that with wizened arms
    Mysteriously declared a twofold path,
    Homeward or onward. But aboard the ships,
    Among the hardier seamen, old Tom Moone,
    With one or two stout comrades, overbore
    All doubts and questionings with blither tales
    Of how they sailed to Darien and heard
    Nightingales in November all night long
    As down a coast like Paradise they cruised
    Through seas of lasting summer, Eden isles,
    Where birds like rainbows, butterflies like gems,
    And flowers like coloured fires o'er fairy creeks
    Floated and flashed beneath the shadowy palms;
    While ever and anon a bark canoe
    With naked Indian maidens flower-festooned
    Put out from shadowy coves, laden with fruit
    Ambrosial o'er the silken shimmering sea.
    And once a troop of nut-brown maidens came--
    So said Tom Moone, a twinkle in his eye--
    Swimming to meet them through the warm blue waves
    And wantoned through the water, like those nymphs
    Which one green April at the Mermaid Inn
    Should hear Kit Marlowe mightily portray,
    Among his boon companions, in a song
    Of Love that swam the sparkling Hellespont
    Upheld by nymphs, not lovelier than these,--
    Though whiter yet not lovelier than these--
    For those like flowers, but these like rounded fruit
    Rosily ripening through the clear tides tossed
    From nut-brown breast and arm all round the ship
    The thousand-coloured spray. Shapely of limb
    They were; but as they laid their small brown hands
    Upon the ropes we cast them, Captain Drake
    Suddenly thundered at them and bade them pack
    For a troop of naughty wenches! At that tale
    A tempest of fierce laughter rolled around
    The foc'sle; but one boy from London town,
    A pale-faced prentice, run-away to sea,
    Asking why Drake had bidden them pack so soon,
    Tom Moone turned to him with his deep-sea growl,
    "Because our Captain is no pink-eyed boy
    Nor soft-limbed Spaniard, but a staunch-souled Man,
    Full-blooded; nerved like iron; with a girl
    He loves at home in Devon; and a mind
    For ever bent upon some mighty goal,
    I know not what--but 'tis enough for me
    To know my Captain knows." And then he told
    How sometimes o'er the gorgeous forest gloom
    Some marble city, rich, mysterious, white,
    An ancient treasure-house of Aztec kings,
    Or palace of forgotten Incas gleamed;
    And in their dim rich lofty cellars gold,
    Beyond all wildest dreams, great bars of gold,
    Like pillars, tossed in mighty chaos, gold
    And precious stones, agate and emerald,
    Diamond, sapphire, ruby, and sardonyx.
    So said he, as they waited the return
    Of Doughty, resting in the foc'sle gloom,
    Or idly couched about the sun-swept decks
    On sails or coils of rope, while overhead
    Some boy would climb the rigging and look out,
    Arching his hand to see if Doughty came.
    But when he came, he came with a strange face
    Of feigned despair; and with a stammering tongue
    He vowed he could not find those poor supplies
    Which Drake himself in other days had found
    Upon that self-same island. But, perchance,
    This was a barren year, he said. And Drake
    Looked at him, suddenly, and at the musketeers.
    Their eyes were strained; their faces wore a cloud.
    That night he said no more; but on the morn,
    Mistrusting nothing, Drake with subtle sense
    Of weather-wisdom, through that little fleet
    Distributed his crews anew. And all
    The prisoners and the prizes at those isles
    They left behind them, taking what they would
    From out their carven cabins,--glimmering silks,
    Chiselled Toledo blades, and broad doubloons.
    And lo, as they weighed anchor, far away
    Behind them on the blue horizon line
    It seemed a city of towering masts arose;
    And from the crow's nest of the _Golden Hynde_
    A seaman cried, "By God; the hunt is up!"
    And like a tide of triumph through their veins
    The red rejoicing blood began to race
    As there they saw the avenging ships of Spain,
    Eight mighty galleons, nosing out their trail.
    And Drake growled, "Oh, my lads of Bideford,
    It cuts my heart to show the hounds our heels;
    But we must not emperil our great quest!
    Such fights as that must wait--as our reward
    When we return. Yet I will not put on
    One stitch of sail. So, lest they are not too slow
    To catch us, clear the decks. God, I would like
    To fight them!" So the little fleet advanced
    With decks all cleared and shotted guns and men
    Bare-armed beside them, hungering to be caught,
    And quite distracted from their former doubts;
    For danger, in that kind, they never feared.
    But soon the heavy Spaniards dropped behind;
    And not in vain had Thomas Doughty sown
    The seeds of doubt; for many a brow grew black
    With sullen-seeming care that erst was gay.
    But happily and in good time there came,
    Not from behind them now, but right in front,
    On the first sun-down of their quest renewed,
    Just as the sea grew dark around their ships,
    A chance that loosed heart-gnawing doubt in deeds.
    For through a mighty zone of golden haze
    Blotting the purple of the gathering night
    A galleon like a floating mountain moved
    To meet them, clad with sunset and with dreams.
    Her masts and spars immense in jewelled mist
    Shimmered: her rigging, like an emerald web
    Of golden spiders, tangled half the stars!
    Embodied sunset, dragging the soft sky
    O'er dazzled ocean, through the night she drew
    Out of the unknown lands; and round a prow
    That jutted like a moving promontory
    Over a cloven wilderness of foam,
    Upon a lofty blazoned scroll her name
    _San Salvador_ challenged obsequious isles
    Where'er she rode; who kneeling like dark slaves
    Before some great Sultàn must lavish forth
    From golden cornucopias, East and West,
    Red streams of rubies, cataracts of pearl.
    But, at a signal from their admiral, all
    Those five small ships lay silent in the gloom
    Which, just as if some god were on their side,
    Covered them in the dark troughs of the waves,
    Letting her pass to leeward. On she came,
    Blazing with lights, a City of the Sea,
    Belted with crowding towers and clouds of sail,
    And round her bows a long-drawn thunder rolled
    Splendid with foam; but ere she passed them by
    Drake gave the word, and with one crimson flash
    Two hundred yards of black and hidden sea
    Leaped into sight between them as the roar
    Of twenty British cannon shattered the night.
    Then after her they drove, like black sea-wolves
    Behind some royal high-branched stag of ten,
    Hanging upon those bleeding foam-flecked flanks,
    Leaping, snarling, worrying, as they went
    In full flight down the wind; for those light ships
    Much speedier than their huge antagonist,
    Keeping to windward, worked their will with her.
    In vain she burnt wild lights and strove to scan
    The darkening deep. Her musketeers in vain
    Provoked the crackling night with random fires:
    In vain her broadside bellowings burst at large
    As if the Gates of Erebus unrolled.
    For ever and anon the deep-sea gloom
    From some new quarter, like a dragon's mouth
    Opened and belched forth crimson flames and tore
    Her sides as if with iron claws unseen;
    Till, all at once, rough voices close at hand
    Out of the darkness thundered, "Grapple her!"
    And, falling on their knees, the Spaniards knew
    The Dragon of that red Apocalypse.
    There with one awful cry, _El Draque! El Draque_!
    They cast their weapons from them; for the moon
    Rose, eastward, and, against her rising, black
    Over the bloody bulwarks, Francis Drake,
    Grasping the great hilt of his naked sword,
    Towered for a moment to their startled eyes
    Through all the zenith like the King of Hell.
    Then he leaped down upon their shining decks,
    And after him swarmed and towered and leapt in haste
    A brawny band of three score Englishmen,
    Gigantic as they loomed against the sky
    And risen, it seemed, by miracle from the sea.
    So small were those five ships below the walls
    Of that huge floating mountain. Royally
    Drake, from the swart commander's trembling hands
    Took the surrendered sword, and bade his men
    Gather the fallen weapons on an heap,
    And placed a guard about them, while the moon
    Silvering the rolling seas for many a mile
    Glanced on the huddled Spaniards' rich attire,
    As like one picture of despair they grouped
    Under the splintered main-mast's creaking shrouds,
    And the great swinging shadows of the sails
    Mysteriously swept the gleaming decks;
    Where many a butt of useless cannon gloomed
    Along the accoutred bulwarks or upturned,
    As the ship wallowed in the heaving deep,
    Dumb mouths of empty menace to the stars.

    Then Drake appointed Doughty, with a guard,
    To sail the prize on to the next dim isle
    Where they might leave her, taking aught they would
    From out her carven cabins and rich holds.
    And Doughty's heart leaped in him as he thought,
    "I have my chance at last"; but Drake, who still
    Trusted the man, made surety doubly sure,
    And in his wary weather-wisdom sent
    --Even as a breathing type of friendship, sent--
    His brother, Thomas Drake, aboard the prize;
    But set his brother, his own flesh and blood,
    Beneath the man, as if to say, "I give
    My loyal friend dominion over me."
    So courteously he dealt with him; but he,
    Seeing his chance once more slipping away,
    Raged inwardly and, from his own false heart
    Imputing his own evil, he contrived
    A cunning charge that night; and when they came
    Next day, at noon, upon the destined isle,
    He suddenly spat the secret venom forth,
    With such fierce wrath in his defeated soul
    That he himself almost believed the charge.
    For when Drake stepped on the _San Salvador_
    To order all things duly about the prize,
    What booty they must keep and what let go,
    Doughty received him with a blustering voice
    Of red mock-righteous wrath, "Is this the way
    Englishmen play the pirate, Francis Drake?
    While thou wast dreaming of thy hero's crown--
    God save the mark!--thy brother, nay, thy spy,
    Must play the common pilferer, must convert
    The cargo to his uses, rob us all
    Of what we risked our necks to win: he wears
    The ransom of an emperor round his throat
    That might enrich us all. Who saw him wear
    That chain of rubies ere last night?"
                                           And Drake,
    "Answer him, brother;" and his brother smiled
    And answered, "Nay, I never wore this chain
    Before last night; but Doughty knows, indeed,
    For he was with me--and none else was there
    But Doughty--'tis my word against his word,
    That close on midnight we were summoned down
    To an English seaman who lay dying below
    Unknown to any of us, a prisoner
    In chains, that had been captured none knew where,
    For all his mind was far from Darien,
    And wandering evermore through Devon lanes
    At home; whom we released; and from his waist
    He took this hidden chain and gave it me,
    Begging me that if ever I returned
    To Bideford in Devon I would go
    With whatsoever wealth it might produce
    To his old mother who, with wrinkled hands
    In some small white-washed cottage o'er the sea,
    Where wall-flowers bloom in April, even now
    Is turning pages of the well-worn Book
    And praying for her son's return, nor knows
    That he lies cold upon the heaving main.
    But this he asked; and this in all good faith
    I swore to do; and even now he died,
    And hurrying hither from his side I clasped
    His chain of rubies round my neck awhile,
    In full sight of the sun. I have no more
    To say." Then up spoke Hatton's trumpeter:
    "But I have more to say. Last night I saw
    Doughty, but not in full sight of the sun,
    Nor once, nor twice, but three times at the least,
    Carrying chains of gold, clusters of gems,
    And whatsoever wealth he could convey
    Into his cabin and smuggle in smallest space."
    "Nay," Doughty stammered, mixing sneer and lie,
    Yet bolstering up his courage with the thought
    That being what courtiers called a gentleman
    He ranked above the rude sea-discipline,
    "Nay, they were free gifts from the Spanish crew
    Because I treated them with courtesy."
    Then bluff Will Harvest, "That perchance were true,
    For he hath been close closeted for hours
    With their chief officers, drinking their health
    In our own war-bought wine, while down below
    Their captured English seaman groaned his last."
    Then Drake, whose utter silence, with a sense
    Of infinite power and justice, ruled their hearts,
    Suddenly thundered--and the traitor blanched
    And quailed before him. "This my flesh and blood
    I placed beneath thee as my dearer self!
    But thou, in trampling on him, shalt not say
    I charged thy brother. Nay, thou chargest me!
    Against me only hast thou stirred this strife;
    And now, by God, shalt thou learn, once for all,
    That I, thy captain for this voyage, hold
    The supreme power of judgment in my hands.
    Get thee aboard my flagship! When I come
    I shall have more to say to thee; but thou,
    My brother, take this galleon in thy charge;
    For, as I see, she holdeth all the stores
    Which Doughty failed to find. She shall return
    With us to that New World from which she came.
    But now let these our prisoners all embark
    In yonder pinnace; let them all go free.
    I care not to be cumbered on my way
    Through dead Magellan's unattempted dream
    With chains and prisoners. In that Golden World
    Which means much more to me than I can speak,
    Much more, much more than I can speak or breathe,
    Being, behind whatever name it bears--
    Earthly Paradise, Island of the Saints,
    Cathay, or Zipangu, or Hy Brasil--
    The eternal symbol of my soul's desire,
    A sacred country shining on the sea,
    That Vision without which, the wise king said,
    A people perishes; in that place of hope,
    That Tirn'an Og, that land of lasting youth,
    Where whosoever sails with me shall drink
    Fountains of immortality and dwell
    Beyond the fear of death for evermore,
    There shall we see the dust of battle dance
    Everywhere in the sunbeam of God's peace!
    Oh, in the new Atlantis of my soul
    There are no captives: there the wind blows free;
    And, as in sleep, I have heard the marching song
    Of mighty peoples rising in the West,
    Wonderful cities that shall set their foot
    Upon the throat of all old tyrannies;
    And on the West wind I have heard a cry,
    The shoreless cry of the prophetic sea
    Heralding through that golden wilderness
    The Soul whose path our task is to make straight,
    Freedom, the last great Saviour of mankind.
    I know not what I know: these are wild words,
    Which, as the sun draws out earth's morning mists
    Over dim fields where careless cattle sleep,
    Some visionary Light, unknown, afar,
    Draws from my darkling soul. Why should we drag
    Thither this Old-World weight of utter gloom,
    Or with the ballast of these heavy hearts
    Make sail in sorrow for Pacific Seas?
    Let us leave chains and prisoners to Spain;
    But set these free to make their own way home!"
    So said he, groping blindly towards the truth,
    And heavy with the treason of his friend.
    His face was like a king's face as he spake,
    For sorrows that strike deep reveal the deep;
    And through the gateways of a raggèd wound
    Sometimes a god will drive his chariot wheels
    From some deep heaven within the hearts of men.
    Nevertheless, the immediate seamen there
    Knowing how great a ransom they might ask
    For some among their prisoners, men of wealth
    And high degree, scarce liked to free them thus;
    And only saw in Drake's conflicting moods
    The moment's whim. "For little will he care,"
    They muttered, "when we reach those fabled shores,
    Whether his cannon break their golden peace."
    Yet to his face they murmured not at all;
    Because his eyes compelled them like a law.
    So there they freed the prisoners and set sail
    Across the earth-shaking shoulders of the broad
    Atlantic, and the great grey slumbrous waves
    Triumphantly swelled up to meet the keels.


BOOK III

    Now in the cabin of the _Golden Hynde_
    At dusk, Drake sent for Doughty. From one wall
    The picture of his love looked down on him;
    And on the table lay the magic chart,
    Drawn on a buffalo horn, all small peaked isles,
    Dwarf promontories, tiny twisted creeks,
    And fairy harbours under elfin hills,
    With marvellous inscriptions lined in red,--
    As _Here is Gold_, or _Many Rubies Here_,
    Or _Ware Witch-crafte_, or _Here is Cannibals_.
    For in his great simplicity the man
    Delighted in it, with the adventurous heart
    Of boyhood poring o'er some well-thumbed tale
    On blue Twelfth Night beside the crimson fire;
    And o'er him, like a vision of a boy
    In his first knighthood when, upon some hill
    Washed by the silver fringes of the sea,
    Amidst the purple heather he lies and reads
    Of Arthur and Avilion, like a star
    His love's pure face looked down. There Doughty came,
    Half fearful, half defiant, with a crowd
    Of jostling half-excuses on his lips,
    And one dark swarm of adders in his heart.
    For now what light of chivalry remained
    In Doughty's mind was thickening with a plot,
    Subtler and deadlier than the serpent's first
    Attempt on our first sire in Eden bower.
    Drake, with a countenance open as the sun,
    Received him, saying: "Forgive me, friend, for I
    Was hasty with thee. I well nigh forgot
    Those large and liberal nights we two have passed
    In this old cabin, telling all our dreams
    And hopes, in friendship, o'er and o'er again.
    But Vicary, thy friend hath talked with me,
    And now--I understand. Thou shalt no more
    Be vexed with a divided mastership.
    Indeed, I trust thee, Doughty. Wilt thou not
    Be friends with me? For now in ample proof
    Thou shalt take charge of this my _Golden Hynde_
    In all things, save of seamanship, which rests
    With the ship's master under my command.
    But I myself will sail upon the prize."
    And with the word he gathered up the chart,
    Took down his lady's picture with a smile,
    Gripped Doughty's hand and left him, staring, sheer
    Bewildered with that magnanimity
    Of faith, throughout all shadows, in some light
    Unseen behind the shadows. Thus did Drake
    Give up his own fair cabin which he loved;
    Being, it seemed, a little travelling home,
    Fragrant with memories,--gave it, as he thought,
    In recompense to one whom he had wronged.
    For even as his mind must ever yearn
    To shores beyond the sunset, even so
    He yearned through all dark shadows to his friend,
    And with his greater nature striving still
    To comprehend the lesser, as the sky
    Embraces our low earth, he would adduce
    Justifications, thus: "These men of law
    Are trained to plead for any and every cause,
    To feign an indignation, or to prove
    The worse is better and that black is white!
    Small wonder that their passion goes astray:
    There is one prayer, one prayer for all of us--
    _Enter not into judgment with Thy servant!_"

    Yet as his boat pulled tow'rd the Spanish prize
    Leaving the _Golden Hynde_, far off he heard
    A voice that chilled him, as the voice of Fate
    Crying like some old Bellman through the world.


SONG

    _Yes; oh, yes; if any seek
      Laughter flown or lost delight,
    Glancing eye or rosy cheek,
      Love shall claim his own to-night!
    Say, hath any lost a friend?
          Yes; oh, yes!
          Let his distress
    In my ditty find its end.

    Yes; oh, yes; here all is found!
      Kingly palaces await
    Each its rightful owner, crowned
      King and consecrate,
    Under the wet and wintry ground!
          Yes; oh, yes!
          There sure redress
    Lies where all is lost and found._

    And Doughty, though Drake's deed of kindness flashed
    A moment's kind contrition through his heart,
    Immediately, with all his lawyer's wit
    True to the cause that hired him, laughed it by,
    And straight began to weave the treacherous web
    Of soft intrigue wherein he meant to snare
    The passions of his comrades. Night and day,
    As that small fleet drove onward o'er the deep,
    Cleaving the sunset with their bright black prows
    Or hunted by the red pursuing Dawn,
    He stirred between the high-born gentlemen
    (Whose white and jewelled hands, gallant in fight,
    And hearts remembering Crécy and Poictiers,
    Were of scant use in common seamanship),
    Between these and the men whose rough tarred arms
    Were good at equal need in storm or war
    Yet took a poorer portion of the prize,
    He stirred a subtle jealousy and fanned
    A fire that swiftly grew almost to hate.
    For when the seamen must take precedence
    Of loiterers on the deck--through half a word,
    Small, with intense device, like some fierce lens,
    He magnified their rude and blustering mode;
    Or urged some scented fop, whose idle brain
    Busied itself with momentary whims,
    To bid the master alter here a sail,
    Or there a rope; and, if the man refused,
    Doughty, at night, across the wine-cups, raved
    Against the rising insolence of the mob;
    And hinted Drake himself was half to blame,
    In words that seemed to say, "I am his friend,
    Or I should bid you think him all to blame."
    So fierce indeed the strife became that once,
    While Chester, Doughty's catspaw, played with fire,
    The grim ship-master growled between his teeth,
    "Remember, sir, remember, ere too late,
    Magellan's mutinous vice-admiral's end."
    And Doughty heard, and with a boisterous laugh
    Slapped the old sea-dog on the back and said,
    "The gallows are for dogs, not gentlemen!"
    Meanwhile his brother, sly John Doughty, sought
    To fan the seamen's fear of the unknown world
    With whispers and conjectures; and, at night,
    He brought old books of Greek and Hebrew down
    Into the foc'sle, claiming by their aid
    A knowledge of Black Art, and power to tell
    The future, which he dreadfully displayed
    There in the flickering light of the oily lamp,
    Bending above their huge and swarthy palms
    And tracing them to many a grisly doom.
    So many a night and day westward they plunged.
    The half-moon ripened to its mellow round,
    Dwindled again and ripened yet again,
    And there was nought around them but the grey
    Ruin and roar of huge Atlantic seas.
    And only like a memory of the world
    They left behind them rose the same great sun,
    And daily rolled his chariot through their sky,
    Whereof the skilled musicians made a song.


SONG

    The same sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other,
          Wherever we be;
    With the same goal before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Ringed round with the sea.

    When the breakers charged thundering
      In thousands all round us
        With a lightning of lances
          Uphurtled on high,
    When the stout ships were sundering
      A rapture hath crowned us,
        Like the wild light that dances
          On the crests that flash by.

    When the waters lay breathless
      Gazing at Hesper
        Guarding the golden
          Fruit of the tree,
    Heard we the deathless
      Wonderful whisper
        Wafting the olden
          Dream of the sea.

    No land in the ring of it
      Now, all around us
        Only the splendid
          Resurging unknown!
    How should we sing of it?--
      This that hath found us
        By the great sun attended
          In splendour, alone.

    Ah! the broad miles of it,
      White with the onset
        Of waves without number
          Warring for glee.
    Ah! the soft smiles of it
      Down to the sunset,
        Holy for slumber,
          The peace of the sea.

    The wave's heart, exalted,
      Leaps forward to meet us,
        The sun on the sea-wave
          Lies white as the moon:
    The soft sapphire-vaulted
      Deep heaven smiles to greet us,
        Free sons of the free-wave
          All singing one tune.

    _The same sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other,
          Wherever we be;
    With the same goal before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Queen of the sea._

    At last a faint-flushed April Dawn arose
    With milk-white arms up-binding golden clouds
    Of fragrant hair behind her lovely head;
    And lo, before the bright black plunging prows
    The whole sea suddenly shattered into shoals
    Of rolling porpoises. Everywhere they tore
    The glittering water. Like a moving crowd
    Of black bright rocks washed smooth by foaming tides,
    They thrilled the unconscious fancy of the crews
    With subtle, wild, and living hints of land.
    And soon Columbus' happy signals came,
    The signs that saved him when his mutineers
    Despaired at last and clamoured to return,--
    And there, with awe triumphant in their eyes,
    They saw, lazily tossing on the tide,
    A drift of seaweed, and a berried branch,
    Which silenced them as if they had seen a Hand
    Writing with fiery letters on the deep,
    Then a black cormorant, vulture of the sea,
    With neck outstretched and one long ominous _honk_,
    Went hurtling past them to its unknown bourne.
    A mighty white-winged albatross came next;
    Then flight on flight of clamorous clanging gulls;
    And last, a wild and sudden shout of "Land!"
    Echoed from crew to crew across the waves.
    Then, dumb upon the rigging as they hung
    Staring at it, a menace chilled their blood.
    For like _Il Gran Nemico_ of Dante, dark,
    Ay, coloured like a thunder-cloud, from North
    To South, in front, there slowly rose to sight
    A country like a dragon fast asleep
    Along the West, with wrinkled, purple wings
    Ending in ragged forests o'er its spine;
    And with great craggy claws out-thrust, that turned
    (As the dire distances dissolved their veils)
    To promontories bounding a huge bay.
    There o'er the hushed and ever shallower tide
    The staring ships drew nigh and thought, "Is this
    The Dragon of our Golden Apple Tree,
    The guardian of the fruit of our desire
    Which grows in gardens of the Hesperides
    Where those three sisters weave a white-armed dance
    Around it everlastingly, and sing
    Strange songs in a strange tongue that still convey
    Warning to heedful souls?" Nearer they drew,
    And now, indeed, from out a soft blue-grey
    Mingling of colours on that coast's deep flank
    There crept a garden of enchantment, height
    O'er height, a garden sloping from the hills,
    Wooded as with Aladdin's trees that bore
    All-coloured clustering gems instead of fruit;
    Now vaster as it grew upon their eyes,
    And like some Roman amphitheatre
    Cirque above mighty cirque all round the bay,
    With jewels and flowers ablaze on women's breasts
    Innumerably confounded and confused;
    While lovely faces flushed with lust of blood,
    Rank above rank upon their tawny thrones
    In soft barbaric splendour lapped, and lulled
    By the low thunderings of a thousand lions,
    Luxuriously smiled as they bent down
    Over the scarlet-splashed and steaming sands
    To watch the white-limbed gladiators die.

    Such fears and dreams for Francis Drake, at least,
    Rose and dissolved in his nigh fevered brain
    As they drew near that equatorial shore;
    For rumours had been borne to him; and now
    He knew not whether to impute the wrong
    To his untrustful mind or to believe
    Doughty a traitorous liar; yet there seemed
    Proof and to spare. A thousand shadows rose
    To mock him with their veiled indicative hands.
    And each alone he laid and exorcised
    But for each doubt he banished, one returned
    From darker depths to mock him o'er again.

    So, in that bay, the little fleet sank sail
    And anchored; and the wild reality
    Behind those dreams towered round them on the hills,
    Or so it seemed. And Drake bade lower a boat,
    And went ashore with sixteen men to seek
    Water; and, as they neared the embowered beach,
    Over the green translucent tide there came,
    A hundred yards from land, a drowsy sound
    Immeasurably repeated and prolonged,
    As of innumerable elfin drums
    Dreamily mustering in the tropic bloom.
    This from without they heard, across the waves;
    But when they glided into a flowery creek
    Under the sharp black shadows of the trees--
    Jaca and Mango and Palm and red festoons
    Of garlanded Liana wreaths--it ebbed
    Into the murmur of the mighty fronds,
    Prodigious leaves whose veinings bore the fresh
    Impression of the finger-prints of God.
    There humming-birds, like flakes of purple fire
    Upon some passing seraph's plumage, beat
    And quivered in blinding blots of golden light
    Between the embattled cactus and cardoon;
    While one huge whisper of primeval awe
    Seemed to await the cool green eventide
    When God should walk His Garden as of old.

    Now as the boats were plying to and fro
    Between the ships and that enchanted shore,
    Drake bade his comrades tarry a little and went
    Apart, alone, into the trackless woods.
    Tormented with his thoughts, he saw all round
    Once more the battling image of his mind,
    Where there was nought of man, only the vast
    Unending silent struggle of Titan trees,
    Large internecine twistings of the world,
    The hushed death-grapple and the still intense
    Locked anguish of Laocoons that gripped
    Death by the throat for thrice three hundred years,
    Once, like a subtle mockery overhead,
    Some black-armed chattering ape swung swiftly by,
    But he strode onward, thinking--"Was it false,
    False all that kind outreaching of the hands?
    False? Was there nothing certain, nothing sure
    In those divinest aisles and towers of Time
    Wherein we took sweet counsel? Is there nought
    Sure but the solid dust beneath our feet?
    Must all those lovelier fabrics of the soul,
    Being so divinely bright and delicate,
    Waver and shine no longer than some poor
    Prismatic aery bubble? Ay, they burst,
    And all their glory shrinks into one tear
    No bitterer than some idle love-lorn maid
    Sheds for her dead canary. God, it hurts,
    This, this hurts most, to think how we must miss
    What might have been, for nothing but a breath,
    A babbling of the tongue, an argument,
    Or such a poor contention as involves
    The thrones and dominations of this earth,--
    How many of us, like seed on barren ground,
    Must miss the flower and harvest of their prayers,
    The living light of friendship and the grasp
    Which for its very meaning once implied
    Eternities of utterance and the life
    Immortal of two souls beyond the grave?"

    Now, wandering upward ever, he reached and clomb
    The slope side of a fern-fringed precipice,
    And, at the summit, found an opening glade,
    Whence, looking o'er the forest, he beheld
    The sea; and, in the land-locked bay below,
    Far, far below, his elfin-tiny ships,
    All six at anchor on the crawling tide!
    Then onward, upward, through the woods once more
    He plunged with bursting heart and burning brow;
    And, once again, like madness, the black shapes
    Of doubt swung through his brain and chattered and laughed,
    Till he upstretched his arms in agony
    And cursed the name of Doughty, cursed the day
    They met, cursed his false face and courtier smiles,
    "For oh," he cried, "how easy a thing it were
    For truth to wear the garb of truth! This proves
    His treachery!" And there, at once, his thoughts
    Tore him another way, as thus, "And yet
    If he were false, is he not subtle enough
    To hide it? Why, this proves his innocence--
    This very courtly carelessness which I,
    Black-hearted evil-thinker as I am,
    In my own clumsier spirit so misjudge!
    These children of the court are butterflies
    Fluttering hither and thither, and I--poor fool--
    Would fix them to a stem and call them flowers,
    Nay, bid them grasp the ground like towering oaks
    And shadow all the zenith;" and yet again
    The madness of distrustful friendship gleamed
    From his fierce eyes, "Oh villain, damnèd villain,
    God's murrain on his heart! I know full well
    He hides what he can hide! He wears no fault
    Upon the gloss and frippery of his breast!
    It is not that! It is the hidden things,
    Unseizable, the things I do not know,
    Ay, it is these, these, these and these alone
    That I mistrust."
                        And, as he walked, the skies
    Grew full of threats, and now enormous clouds
    Rose mammoth-like above the ensanguined deep,
    Trampling the daylight out; and, with its death
    Dyed purple, rushed along as if they meant
    To obliterate the world. He took no heed.
    Though that strange blackness brimmed the branching aisles
    With horror, he strode on till in the gloom,
    Just as his winding way came out once more
    Over a precipice that o'erlooked the bay,
    There, as he went, not gazing down, but up,
    He saw what seemed a ponderous granite cliff,
    A huge ribbed shell upon a lonely shore
    Left by forgotten mountains when they sank
    Back to earth's breast like billows on a sea.
    A tall and whispering crowd of tree-ferns waved
    Mysterious fringes round it. In their midst
    He flung himself at its broad base, with one
    Sharp shivering cry of pain, "Show me Thy ways,
    O God, teach me Thy paths! I am in the dark!
    Lighten my darkness!"
                            Almost as he spoke
    There swept across the forest, far and wide,
    Gathering power and volume as it came,
    A sound as of a rushing mighty wind;
    And, overhead, like great black gouts of blood
    Wrung from the awful forehead of the Night
    The first drops fell and ceased. Then, suddenly,
    Out of the darkness, earth with all her seas,
    Her little ships at anchor in the bay
    (Five ebony ships upon a sheet of silver,
    Drake saw not that, indeed, Drake saw not that!),
    Her woods, her boughs, her leaves, her tiniest twigs.
    Leapt like a hunted stag through one immense
    Lightning of revelation into the murk
    Of Erebus: then heaven o'er rending heaven
    Shattered and crashed down ruin over the world.
    But, in that deeper darkness, Francis Drake
    Stood upright now, and with blind outstretched arms
    Groped at that strange forgotten cliff and shell
    Of mystery; for in that flash of light
    Æons had passed; and now the Thing in front
    Made his blood freeze with memories that lay
    Behind his Memory. In the gloom he groped,
    And with dark hands that knew not what they knew,
    As one that shelters in the night, unknowing,
    Beneath a stranded shipwreck, with a cry
    He touched the enormous rain-washed belted ribs
    And bones like battlements of some Mastodon
    Embedded there until the trump of doom.

    After long years, long centuries, perchance,
    Triumphantly some other pioneer
    Would stand where Drake now stood and read the tale
    Of ages where he only felt the cold
    Touch in the dark of some huge mystery;
    Yet Drake might still be nearer to the light
    Who now was whispering from his great deep heart,
    "Show me Thy ways, O God, teach me Thy paths!"
    And there by some strange instinct, oh, he felt
    God's answer there, as if he grasped a hand
    Across a gulf of twice ten thousand years;
    And he regained his lost magnificence
    Of faith in that great Harmony which resolves
    Our discords, faith through all the ruthless laws
    Of nature in their lovely pitilessness,
    Faith in that Love which outwardly must wear,
    Through all the sorrows of eternal change,
    The splendour of the indifference of God.
    All round him through the heavy purple gloom
    Sloped the soft rush of silver-arrowed rain,
    Loosening the skies' hard anguish, as with tears.
    Once more he felt his unity with all
    The vast composure of the universe,
    And drank deep at the fountains of that peace
    Which comprehends the tumult of our days.
    But with that peace the power to act returned;
    And, with his back against the Mastodon,
    He stared through the great darkness tow'rds the sea.
    The rain ceased for a moment: only the slow
    Drip of the dim droop-feathered palms all round
    Deepened the hush.
                        Then, out of the gloom once more
    The whole earth leapt to sight with all her woods,
    Her boughs, her leaves, her tiniest twigs distinct
    For one wild moment; but Drake only saw
    The white flash of her seas and there, oh there
    That land-locked bay with those five elfin ships,
    Five elfin ebony ships upon a sheet
    Of wrinkled silver! Then, as the thunder followed,
    One thought burst through his brain--
                                            _One ship was gone!_
    Over the grim precipitous edge he hung,
    An eagle waiting for the lightning now
    To swoop upon his prey. One iron hand
    Gripped a rough tree-root like a bunch of snakes;
    And, as the rain rushed round him, far away
    He saw to northward yet another flash,
    A scribble of God's finger in the sky
    Over a waste of white stampeding waves.
    His eye flashed like a falchion as he saw it,
    And from his lips there burst the sea-king's laugh;
    For there, with a fierce joy he knew, he knew
    Doughty, at last--an open mutineer!
    An open foe to fight! Ay, there she went,--
    His _Golden Hynde_, his little _Golden Hynde_
    A wild deserter scudding to the North.
    And, almost ere the lightning, Drake had gone
    Crashing down the face of the precipice,
    By a narrow water-gully, and through the huge
    Forest he tore the straight and perilous way
    Down to the shore; while, three miles to the North,
    Upon the wet poop of the _Golden Hynde_
    Doughty stood smiling. Scarce would he have smiled
    Knowing that Drake had seen him from that tower
    Amidst the thunders; but, indeed, he thought
    He had escaped unseen amidst the storm.
    Many a day he had worked upon the crew,
    Fanning their fears and doubts until he won
    The more part to his side. And when they reached
    That coast, he showed them how Drake meant to sail
    Southward, into that unknown Void; but he
    Would have them suddenly slip by stealth away
    Northward to Darien, showing them what a life
    Of roystering glory waited for them there,
    If, laying aside this empty quest, they joined
    The merry feasters round those island fires
    Which over many a dark-blue creek illumed
    Buccaneer camps in scarlet logwood groves,
    Fringing the Gulf of Mexico, till dawn
    Summoned the Black Flags out to sweep the sea.

    But when Drake reached the flower-embowered boat
    And found the men awaiting his return
    There, in a sheltering grove of bread-fruit trees
    Beneath great eaves of leafage that obscured
    Their sight, but kept the storm out, as they tossed
    Pieces of eight or rattled the bone dice,
    His voice went through them like a thunderbolt,
    For none of them had seen the _Golden Hynde_
    Steal from the bay; and now the billows burst
    Like cannon down the coast; and they had thought
    Their boat could not be launched until the storm
    Abated. Under Drake's compelling eyes,
    Nevertheless, they poled her down the creek
    Without one word, waiting their chance. Then all
    Together with their brandished oars they thrust,
    And on the fierce white out-draught of a wave
    They shot up, up and over the toppling crest
    Of the next, and plunged crashing into the trough
    Behind it: then they settled at their thwarts,
    And the fierce water boiled before their blades
    As, with Drake's iron hand upon the helm,
    They soared and crashed across the rolling seas.

    Not for the Spanish prize did Drake now steer,
    But for that little ship the _Marygold_,
    Swiftest of sail, next to the _Golden Hynde_,
    And, in the hands of Francis Drake, indeed
    Swiftest of all; and ere the seamen knew
    What power, as of a wind, bore them along,
    Anchor was up, their hands were on the sheets,
    The sails were broken out, the _Marygold_
    Was flying like a storm-cloud to the North,
    And on her poop an iron statue still
    As death stood Francis Drake.
                                  One hour they rushed
    Northward, with green seas washing o'er the deck
    And buffeted with splendour; then they saw
    The _Golden Hynde_ like some wing-broken gull
    With torn mismanaged plumes beating the air
    In peril of utter shipwreck; saw her fly
    Half-mast, a feeble signal of distress
    Despite all Doughty's curses; for her crew
    Wild with divisions torn amongst themselves
    Most gladly now surrendered in their hearts,
    As close alongside grandly onward swept
    The _Marygold_, with canvas trim and taut
    Magnificently drawing the full wind,
    Her gunners waiting at their loaded guns
    Bare-armed and silent; and that iron soul
    Alone, upon her silent quarter-deck.
    There they hauled up into the wind and lay
    Rocking, while Drake, alone, without a guard,
    Boarding the runaway, dismissed his boat
    Back to the _Marygold_. Then his voice out-rang
    Trumpet-like o'er the trembling mutineers,
    And clearly, as if they were but busied still
    About the day's routine. They hid their shame,
    As men that would propitiate a god,
    By flying to fulfil his lightest word;
    And ere they knew what power, as of a wind,
    Impelled them--that half wreck was trim and taut,
    Her sails all drawing and her bows afoam;
    And, creeping past the _Marygold_ once more,
    She led their Southward way! And not till then
    Did Drake vouchsafe one word to the white face
    Of Doughty, as he furtively slunk nigh
    With some new lie upon his fear-parched lips
    Thirsting for utterance in his crackling laugh
    Of deprecation; and with one ruffling puff
    Of pigeon courage in his blinded soul--
    "I am no sea-dog--even Francis Drake
    Would scarce misuse a gentleman."
                                        Then Drake turned
    And summoned four swart seamen out by name.
    His words went like a cold wind through their flesh
    As with a passionless voice he slowly said,
    "Take ye this fellow: bind him to the mast
    Until what time I shall decide his fate."
    And Doughty gasped as at the world's blank end,--
    "Nay, Francis," cried he, "wilt thou thus misuse
    A gentleman?" But as the seamen gripped
    His arms he struggled vainly and furiously
    To throw them off; and in his impotence
    Let slip the whole of his treacherous cause and hope
    In empty wrath,--"Fore God," he foamed and snarled,
    "Ye shall all smart for this when we return!
    Unhand me, dogs! I have Lord Burleigh's power
    Behind me. There is nothing I have done
    Without his warrant! Ye shall smart for this!
    Unhand me, I say, unhand me!"
                                    And in one flash
    Drake saw the truth, and Doughty saw his eyes
    Lighten upon him; and his false heart quailed
    Once more; and he suddenly suffered himself
    Quietly, strangely, to be led away
    And bound without a murmur to the mast.
    And strangely Drake remembered, as those words,
    "Ye shall all smart for this when we return,"
    Yelped at his faith, how while the Dover cliffs
    Faded from sight he leaned to his new friend
    Doughty and said: "I blame them not who stay!
    I blame them not at all who cling to home,
    For many of us, indeed, shall not return,
    Nor ever know that sweetness any more."

    And when they had reached their anchorage anew,
    Drake, having now resolved to bring his fleet
    Beneath a more compact control, at once
    Took all the men and the chief guns and stores
    From out the Spanish prize; and sent Tom Moone
    To set the hulk afire. Also he bade
    Unbind the traitor and ordered him aboard
    The pinnace _Christopher_. John Doughty, too,
    He ordered thither, into the grim charge
    Of old Tom Moone, thinking it best to keep
    The poisonous leaven carefully apart
    Until they had won well Southward, to a place
    Where, finally committed to their quest,
    They might arraign the traitor without fear
    Or favour, and acquit him or condemn.
    But those two brothers, doubting as the false
    Are damned to doubt, saw murder in his eyes,
    And thought "He means to sink the smack one night."
    And they refused to go, till Drake abruptly
    Ordered them straightway to be slung on board
    With ropes.
                  The daylight waned; but ere the sun
    Sank, the five ships were plunging to the South;
    For Drake would halt no longer, least the crows
    Also should halt betwixt two purposes.
    He took the tide of fortune at the flood;
    And onward through the now subsiding storm,
    Ere they could think what power as of a wind
    Impelled them, he had swept them on their way.
    Far, far into the night they saw the blaze
    That leapt in crimson o'er the abandoned hulk
    Behind them, like a mighty hecatomb
    Marking the path of some Titanic will.
    Many a night and day they Southward drove.
    Sometimes at midnight round them all the sea
    Quivered with witches' oils and water snakes,
    Green, blue, and red, with lambent tongues of fire.
    Mile upon mile about the blurred black hulls
    A cauldron of tempestuous colour coiled.
    On every mast mysterious meteors burned,
    And from the shores a bellowing rose and fell
    As of great bestial gods that walked all night
    Through some wild hell unknown, too vast for men;
    But when the silver and crimson of the dawn
    Broke out, they saw the tropic shores anew,
    The fair white foam, and, round about the rocks,
    Weird troops of tusked sea-lions; and the world
    Mixed with their dreams and made them stranger still.
    And, once, so fierce a tempest scattered the fleet
    That even the hardiest souls began to think
    There was a Jonah with them; for the seas
    Rose round them like green mountains, peaked and rigged
    With heights of Alpine snow amongst the clouds;
    And many a league to Southward, when the ships
    Gathered again amidst the sinking waves
    Four only met. The ship of Thomas Drake
    Was missing; and some thought it had gone down
    With all hands in the storm. But Francis Drake
    Held on his way, learning from hour to hour
    To merge himself in immortality;
    Learning the secrets of those pitiless laws
    Which dwarf all mortal grief, all human pain,
    To something less than nothing by the side
    Of that eternal travail dimly guessed,
    Since first he felt in the miraculous dark
    The great bones of the Mastodon, that hulk
    Of immemorial death. He learned to judge
    The passing pageant of this outward world
    As by the touch-stone of that memory;
    Even as in that country which some said
    Lay now not far, the great Tezcucan king,
    Resting his jewelled hand upon a skull,
    And on a smouldering glory of jewels throned
    There in his temple of the Unknown God
    Over the host of Aztec princes, clad
    In golden hauberks gleaming under soft
    Surcoats of green or scarlet feather-work,
    Could in the presence of a mightier power
    Than life or death, give up his guilty sons,
    His only sons, to the sacrificial sword.
    And hour by hour the soul of Francis Drake,
    Unconscious as an oak-tree of its growth,
    Increased in strength and stature as he drew
    Earth, heaven, and hell within him, more and more.
    For as the dream we call our world, with all
    Its hues is but a picture in the brain,
    So did his soul enfold the universe
    With gradual sense of superhuman power,
    While every visible shape within the vast
    Horizon seemed the symbol of some, thought
    Waiting for utterance. He had found indeed
    God's own Nirvana, not of empty dream,
    But of intensest life. Nor did he think
    Aught of all this; but, as the rustic deems
    The colours that he carries in his brain
    Are somehow all outside him while he peers
    Unaltered through two windows in his face,
    Drake only knew that as the four ships plunged
    Southward, the world mysteriously grew
    More like a prophet's vision, hour by hour,
    Fraught with dark omens and significances,
    A world of hieroglyphs and sacred signs
    Wherein he seemed to read the truth that lay
    Hid from the Roman augurs when of old
    They told the future from the flight of birds.
    How vivid with disaster seemed the flight
    Of those blood-red flamingoes o'er the dim
    Blue steaming forest, like two terrible thoughts
    Flashing, unapprehended, through his brain!

    And now, as they drove Southward, day and night,
    Through storm and calm, the shores that fleeted by
    Grew wilder, grander, with his growing soul,
    And pregnant with the approaching mystery.
    And now along the Patagonian coast
    They cruised, and in the solemn midnight saw
    Wildernesses of shaggy barren marl,
    Petrified seas of lava, league on league,
    Craters and bouldered slopes and granite cliffs
    With ragged rents, grim gorges, deep ravines,
    And precipice on precipice up-piled
    Innumerable to those dim distances
    Where, over valleys hanging in the clouds,
    Gigantic mountains and volcanic peaks
    Catching the wefts of cirrus fleece appeared
    To smoke against the sky, though all was now
    Dead as that frozen chaos of the moon,
    Or some huge passion of a slaughtered soul
    Prostrate under the marching of the stars.

    At last, and in a silver dawn, they came
    Suddenly on a broad-winged estuary,
    And, in the midst of it, an island lay,
    There they found shelter, on its leeward side,
    And Drake convened upon the _Golden Hynde_
    His dread court-martial. Two long hours he heard
    Defence and accusation, then broke up
    The conclave, and, with burning heart and brain,
    Feverishly seeking everywhere some sign
    To guide him, went ashore upon that isle,
    And lo, turning a rugged point of rock,
    He rubbed his eyes to find out if he dreamed,
    For there--a Crusoe's wonder, a miracle,
    A sign--before him stood on that lone strand
    Stark, with a stern arm pointing out his way
    And jangling still one withered skeleton,
    The grim black gallows where Magellan hanged
    His mutineers. Its base was white with bones
    Picked by the gulls, and crumbling o'er the sand
    A dread sea-salt, dry from the tides of time.
    There, on that lonely shore, Death's finger-post
    Stood like some old forgotten truth made strange
    By the long lapse of many memories,
    All starting up in resurrection now
    As at the trump of doom, heroic ghosts
    Out of the cells and graves of his deep brain
    Reproaching him. "_Were this man not thy friend,
    Ere now he should have died the traitor's death.
    What wilt thou say to others if they, too,
    Prove false? Or wilt thou slay the lesser and save
    The greater sinner? Nay, if thy right hand
    Offend thee, cut it off!_" And, in one flash,
    Drake saw his path and chose it.
                                      With a voice
    Low as the passionless anguished voice of Fate
    That comprehends all pain, but girds it round
    With iron, lest some random cry break out
    For man's misguidance, he drew all his men
    Around him, saying, "Ye all know how I loved
    Doughty, who hath betrayed me twice and thrice,
    For I still trusted him: he was no felon
    That I should turn my heart away from him.
    He is the type and image of man's laws;
    While I--am lawless as the soul that still
    Must sail and seek a world beyond the worlds,
    A law behind earth's laws. I dare not judge!
    But ye--who know the mighty goal we seek,
    Who have seen him sap our courage, hour by hour,
    Till God Himself almost appeared a dream
    Behind his technicalities and doubts
    Of aught he could not touch or handle: ye
    Who have seen him stir up jealousy and strife
    Between our seamen and our gentlemen,
    Even as the world stirs up continual strife,
    Bidding the man forget he is a man
    With God's own patent of nobility;
    Ye who have seen him strike this last sharp blow--
    Sharper than any enemy hath struck,--
    He whom I trusted, he alone could strike--
    So sharply, for indeed I loved this man.
    Judge ye--for see, I cannot. Do not doubt
    I loved this man!
    But now, if ye will let him have his life,
    Oh, speak! But, if ye think it must be death,
    Hold up your hands in silence!" His voice dropped,
    And eagerly he whispered forth one word
    Beyond the scope of Fate--
    "I would not have him die!" There was no sound
    Save the long thunder of eternal seas,--
    Drake bowed his head and waited.
                                              Suddenly,
    One man upheld his hand; then, all at once,
    A brawny forest of brown arms arose
    In silence, and the great sea whispered _Death_.

       *   *   *   *

    There, with one big swift impulse, Francis Drake
    Held out his right sun-blackened hand and gripped
    The hand that Doughty proffered him; and lo,
    Doughty laughed out and said, "Since I must die,
    Let us have one more hour of comradeship,
    One hour as old companions. Let us make
    A feast here, on this island, ere I go
    Where there is no more feasting." So they made
    A great and solemn banquet as the day
    Decreased; and Doughty bade them all unlock
    Their sea-chests and bring out their rich array.
    There, by that wondering ocean of the West,
    In crimson doublets, lined and slashed with gold,
    In broidered lace and double golden chains
    Embossed with rubies and great cloudy pearls
    They feasted, gentlemen adventurers,
    Drinking old malmsey, as the sun sank down.

    Now Doughty, fronting the rich death of day,
    And flourishing a silver pouncet-box
    With many a courtly jest and rare conceit,
    There as he sat in rich attire, out-braved
    The rest. Though darker-hued, yet richer far,
    His murrey-coloured doublet double-piled
    Of Genoa velvet, puffed with ciprus, shone;
    For over its grave hues the gems that bossed
    His golden collar, wondrously relieved,
    Blazed lustrous to the West like stars. But Drake
    Was clad in black, with midnight silver slashed,
    And, at his side, a great two-handed sword.
    At last they rose, just as the sun's last rays
    Rested upon the heaving molten gold
    Immeasurable. The long slow sigh of the waves
    That creamed across the lonely time-worn reef
    All round the island seemed the very voice
    Of the Everlasting: black against the sea
    The gallows of Magellan stretched its arm
    With the gaunt skeleton and its rusty chain
    Creaking and swinging in the solemn breath
    Of eventide like some strange pendulum
    Measuring out the moments that remained.
    There did they take the holy sacrament
    Of Jesus' body and blood. Then Doughty and Drake
    Kissed each other, as brothers, on the cheek;
    And Doughty knelt. And Drake, without one word,
    Leaning upon the two-edged naked sword
    Stood at his side, with iron lips, and eyes
    Full of the sunset; while the doomed man bowed
    His head upon a rock. The great sun dropped
    Suddenly, and the land and sea were dark;
    And as it were a sign, Drake lifted up
    The gleaming sword. It seemed to sweep the heavens
    Down in its arc as he smote, once, and no more.

    Then, for a moment, silence froze their veins,
    Till one fierce seamen stooped with a hoarse cry;
    And, like an eagle clutching up its prey,
    His arm swooped down and bore the head aloft,
    Gorily streaming, by the long dark hair;
    And a great shout went up, "So perish all
    Traitors to God and England." Then Drake turned
    And bade them to their ships; and, wondering,
    They left him. As the boats thrust out from shore
    Brave old Tom Moone looked back with faithful eyes
    Like a great mastiff to his master's face.
    He, looming larger from his loftier ground
    Clad with the slowly gathering night of stars
    And gazing seaward o'er his quiet dead,
    Seemed like some Titan bronze in grandeur based
    Unshakeable until the crash of doom
    Shatter the black foundations of the world.


BOOK IV

    Dawn, everlasting and almighty Dawn,
    Hailed by ten thousand names of death and birth,
    Who, chiefly by thy name of Sorrow, seem'st
    To half the world a sunset, God's great Dawn,
    Fair light of all earth's partings till we meet
    Where dawn and sunset, mingling East and West,
    Shall make in some deep Orient of the soul
    One radiant Rose of Love for evermore;
    Teach me, oh teach to bear thy broadening light,
    Thy deepening wonder, lest as old dreams fade
    With love's unfaith, like wasted hours of youth,
    And dim illusions vanish in thy beam,
    Their rapture and their anguish break that heart
    Which loved them, and must love for ever now.
    Let thy great sphere of splendour, ring by ring
    For ever widening, draw new seas, new skies,
    Within my ken; yet, as I still must bear
    This love, help me to grow in spirit with thee.
    Dawn on my song which trembles like a cloud
    Pierced with thy beauty. Rise, shine, as of old
    Across the wondering ocean in the sight
    Of those world-wandering mariners, when earth
    Rolled flat up to the Gates of Paradise,
    And each slow mist that curled its gold away
    From each new sea they furrowed into pearl
    Might bring before their blinded mortal eyes
    God and the Glory. Lighten as on the soul
    Of him that all night long in torment dire,
    Anguish and thirst unceasing for thy ray
    Upon that lonely Patagonian shore
    Had lain as on the bitterest coasts of Hell.
    For all night long, mocked by the dreadful peace
    Of world-wide seas that darkly heaved and sank
    With cold recurrence, like the slow sad breath
    Of a fallen Titan dying all alone
    In lands beyond all human loneliness,
    While far and wide glimmers that broken targe
    Hurled from tremendous battle with the gods,
    And, as he breathes in pain, the chain-mail rings
    Round his broad breast a muffled rattling make
    For many a league, so seemed the sound of waves
    Upon those beaches--there, be-mocked all night,
    Beneath Magellan's gallows, Drake had watched
    Beside his dead; and over him the stars
    Paled as the silver chariot of the moon
    Drove, and her white steeds ramped in a fury of foam
    On splendid peaks of cloud. The _Golden Hynde_
    Slept with those other shadows on the bay.
    Between him and his home the Atlantic heaved;
    And, on the darker side, across the strait
    Of starry sheen that softly rippled and flowed
    Betwixt the mainland and his isle, it seemed
    Death's Gates indeed burst open. The night yawned
    Like a foul wound. Black shapes of the outer dark
    Poured out of forests older than the world;
    And, just as reptiles that take form and hue,
    Speckle and blotch, in strange assimilation
    From thorn and scrub and stone and the waste earth
    Through which they crawl, so that almost they seem
    The incarnate spirits of their wilderness,
    Were these most horrible kindred of the night.
    Æonian glooms unfathomable, grim aisles,
    Grotesque, distorted boughs and dancing shades
    Out-belched their dusky brood on the dim shore;
    Monsters with sooty limbs, red-raddled eyes,
    And faces painted yellow, women and men;
    Fierce naked giants howling to the moon,
    And loathlier Gorgons with long snaky tresses
    Pouring vile purple over pendulous breasts
    Like wine-bags. On the mainland beach they lit
    A brushwood fire that reddened creek and cove
    And lapped their swarthy limbs with hideous tongues
    Of flame; so near that by their light Drake saw
    The blood upon the dead man's long black hair
    Clotting corruption. The fierce funeral pyre
    Of all things fair seemed rolling on that shore;
    And in that dull red battle of smoke and flame,
    While the sea crunched the pebbles, and dark drums
    Rumbled out of the gloom as if this earth
    Had some Titanic tigress for a soul
    Purring in forests of Eternity
    Over her own grim dreams, his lonely spirit
    Passed through the circles of a world-wide waste
    Darker than ever Dante roamed. No gulf
    Was this of fierce harmonious reward,
    Where Evil moans in anguish after death,
    Where all men reap as they have sown, where gluttons
    Gorge upon toads and usurers gulp hot streams
    Of molten gold. This was that Malebolge
    Which hath no harmony to mortal ears,
    But seems the reeling and tremendous dream
    Of some omnipotent madman. There he saw
    The naked giants dragging to the flames
    Young captives hideous with a new despair:
    He saw great craggy blood-stained stones upheaved
    To slaughter, saw through mists of blood and fire
    The cannibal feast prepared, saw filthy hands
    Rend limb from limb, and almost dreamed he saw
    Foul mouths a-drip with quivering human flesh
    And horrible laughter in the crimson storm
    That clomb and leapt and stabbed at the high heaven
    Till the whole night seemed saturate with red.

    And all night long upon the _Golden Hynde_,
    A cloud upon the waters, brave Tom Moone
    Watched o'er the bulwarks for some dusky plunge
    To warn him if that savage crew should mark
    His captain and swim over to his isle.
    Whistle in hand he watched, his boat well ready,
    His men low-crouched around him, swarthy faces
    Grim-chinned upon the taffrail, muttering oaths
    That trampled down the fear i' their bristly throats,
    While at their sides a dreadful hint of steel
    Sent stray gleams to the stars. But little heed
    Had Drake of all that menaced him, though oft
    Some wandering giant, belching from the feast,
    All blood-besmeared, would come so near he heard
    His heavy breathing o'er the narrow strait.
    Yet little care had Drake, for though he sat
    Bowed in the body above his quiet dead,
    His burning spirit wandered through the wastes,
    Wandered through hells behind the apparent hell,
    Horrors immeasurable, clutching at dreams
    Found fair of old, but now most foul. The world
    Leered at him through its old remembered mask
    Of beauty: the green grass that clothed the fields
    Of England (shallow, shallow fairy dream!)
    What was it but the hair of dead men's graves.
    Rooted in death, enriched with all decay?
    And like a leprosy the hawthorn bloom
    Crawled o'er the whitening bosom of the spring;
    And bird and beast and insect, ay and man,
    How fat they fed on one another's blood!
    And Love, what faith in Love, when spirit and flesh
    Are found of such a filthy composition?
    And Knowledge, God, his mind went reeling back
    To that dark voyage on the deadly coast
    Of Panama, where one by one his men
    Sickened and died of some unknown disease,
    Till Joseph, his own brother, in his arms
    Died; and Drake trampled down all tender thought,
    All human grief, and sought to find the cause,
    For his crew's sake, the ravenous unknown cause
    Of that fell scourge. There, in his own dark cabin,
    Lit by the wild light of the swinging lanthorn,
    He laid the naked body on that board
    Where they had supped together. He took the knife
    From the ague-stricken surgeon's palsied hands,
    And while the ship rocked in the eternal seas
    And dark waves lapped against the rolling hulk
    Making the silence terrible with voices,
    He opened his own brother's cold white corse,
    That pale deserted mansion of a soul,
    Bidding the surgeon mark, with his own eyes,
    While yet he had strength to use them, the foul spots,
    The swollen liver, the strange sodden heart,
    The yellow intestines. Yea, his dry lips hissed
    There in the stark face of Eternity,
    "Seëst thou? Seëst thou? Knowest thou what it means?"
    Then, like a dream up-surged the belfried night
    Of Saint Bartholomew, the scented palaces
    Whence harlots leered out on the twisted streets
    Of Paris, choked with slaughter! Europe flamed
    With human torches, living altar candles,
    Lighted before the Cross where men had hanged
    The Christ of little children. Cirque by cirque
    The world-wide hell reeled round him, East and West,
    To where the tortured Indians worked the will
    Of lordly Spain in golden-famed Peru.
    "God, is thy world a madman's dream?" he groaned:
    And suddenly, the clamour on the shore
    Sank and that savage horde melted away
    Into the midnight forest as it came,
    Leaving no sign, save where the brushwood fire
    Still smouldered like a ruby in the gloom;
    And into the inmost caverns of his mind
    That other clamour sank, and there was peace.
    "A madman's dream," he whispered, "Ay, to me
    A madman's dream," but better, better far
    Than that which bears upon its awful gates,
    Gates of a hell defined, unalterable,
    _Abandon hope all ye who enter here!_
    Here, here at least the dawn hath power to bring
    New light, new hope, new battles. Men may fight
    And sweep away that evil, if no more,
    At least from the small circle of their swords;
    Then die, content if they have struck one stroke
    For freedom, knowledge, brotherhood; one stroke
    To hasten that great kingdom God proclaims
    Each morning through the trumpets of the Dawn.

    And far away, in Italy, that night
    Young Galileo, gazing upward, heard
    The self-same whisper from the abyss of stars
    Which lured the soul of Shakespeare as he lay
    Dreaming in may-sweet England, even now,
    And with its infinite music called once more
    The soul of Drake out to the unknown West.

    Now like a wild rose in the fields of heaven
    Slipt forth the slender fingers of the Dawn,
    And drew the great grey Eastern curtains back
    From the ivory saffroned couch. Rosily slid
    One shining foot and one warm rounded knee
    From silken coverlets of the tossed-back clouds.
    Then, like the meeting after desolate years,
    Face to remembered face, Drake saw the Dawn
    Step forth in naked splendour o'er the sea;
    Dawn, bearing still her rich divine increase
    Of beauty, love, and wisdom round the world;
    The same, yet not the same. So strangely gleamed
    Her pearl and rose across the sapphire waves
    That scarce he knew the dead man at his feet.
    His world was made anew. Strangely his voice
    Rang through that solemn Eden of the morn
    Calling his men, and stranger than a dream
    Their boats black-blurred against the crimson East,
    Or flashing misty sheen where'er the light
    Smote on their smooth wet sides, like seraph ships
    Moved in a dewy glory towards the land;
    Their oars of glittering diamond broke the sea
    As by enchantment into burning jewels
    And scattered rainbows from their flaming blades.
    The clear green water lapping round their prows,
    The words of sharp command as now the keels
    Crunched on his lonely shore, and the following wave
    Leapt slapping o'er the sterns, in that new light
    Were more than any miracle. At last
    Drake, as they grouped a little way below
    The crumbling sandy cliff whereon he stood,
    Seeming to overshadow them as he loomed
    A cloud of black against the crimson sky,
    Spoke, as a man may hardly speak but once:
    "My seamen, oh my friends, companions, kings;
    For I am least among you, being your captain;
    And ye are men, and all men born are kings,
    By right divine, and I the least of these
    Because I must usurp the throne of God
    And sit in judgment, even till I have set
    My seal upon the red wax of this blood,
    This blood of my dead friend, ere it grow cold.
    Not all the waters of that mighty sea
    Could wash my hands of sin if I should now
    Falter upon my path. But look to it, you,
    Whose word was doom last night to this dead man;
    Look to it, I say, look to it! Brave men might shrink
    From this great voyage; but the heart of him
    Who dares turn backward now must be so hardy
    That God might make a thousand millstones of it
    To hang about the necks of those that hurt
    Some little child, and cast them in the sea.
    Yet if ye will be found so more than bold,
    Speak now, and I will hear you; God will judge.
    But ye shall take four ships of these my five,
    Tear out the lions from their painted shields,
    And speed you homeward. Leave me but one ship,
    My _Golden Hynde_, and five good friends, nay one,
    To watch when I must sleep, and I will prove
    This judgment just against all winds that blow.
    Now ye that will return, speak, let me know you,
    Or be for ever silent, for I swear
    Over this butchered body, if any swerve
    Hereafter from the straight and perilous way,
    He shall not die alone. What? Will none speak?
    My comrades and my friends! Yet ye must learn,
    Mark me, my friends, I'd have you all to know
    That ye are kings. I'll have no jealousies
    Aboard my fleet. I'll have the gentleman
    To pull and haul wi' the seaman. I'll not have
    That canker of the Spaniards in my fleet.
    Ye that were captains, I cashier you all.
    I'll have no captains; I'll have nought but seamen,
    Obedient to my will, because I serve
    England. What, will ye murmur? Have a care,
    Lest I should bid you homeward all alone,
    You whose white hands are found too delicate
    For aught but dallying with your jewelled swords!
    And thou, too, master Fletcher, my ship's chaplain,
    Mark me, I'll have no priest-craft. I have heard
    Overmuch talk of judgment from thy lips,
    God's judgment here, God's judgment there, upon us!
    Whene'er the winds are contrary, thou takest
    Their powers upon thee for thy moment's end.
    Thou art God's minister, not God's oracle:
    Chain up thy tongue a little, or, by His wounds,
    If thou canst read this wide world like a book,
    Thou hast so little to fear, I'll set thee adrift
    On God's great sea to find thine own way home.
    Why, 'tis these very tyrannies o' the soul
    We strike at when we strike at Spain for England;
    And shall we here, in this great wilderness,
    Ungrappled and unchallenged, out of sight,
    Alone, without one struggle, sink that flag
    Which, when the cannon thundered, could but stream
    Triumphant over all the storms of death.
    Nay, master Wynter and my gallant captains,
    I see ye are tamed. Take up your ranks again
    In humbleness, remembering ye are kings,
    Kings for the sake and by the will of England,
    Therefore her servants till your lives' last end.
    Comrades, mistake not this, our little fleet
    Is freighted with the golden heart of England,
    And, if we fail, that golden heart will break.
    The world's wide eyes are on us, and our souls
    Are woven together into one great flag
    Of England. Shall we strike it? Shall it be rent
    Asunder with small discord, party strife,
    Ephemeral conflict of contemptible tongues,
    Or shall it be blazoned, blazoned evermore
    On the most heaven-wide page of history?
    This is that hour, I know it in my soul,
    When we must choose for England. Ye are kings,
    And sons of Vikings, exiled from your throne.
    Have ye forgotten? Nay, your blood remembers!
    There is your kingdom, Vikings, that great ocean
    Whose tang is in your nostrils. Ye must choose
    Whether to re-assume it now for England,
    To claim its thunders for her panoply,
    To lay its lightnings in her sovereign hands,
    Win her the great commandment of the sea
    And let its glory roll with her dominion
    Round the wide world for ever, sweeping back
    All evil deeds and dreams, or whether to yield
    For evermore that kinghood. Ye must learn
    Here in this golden dawn our great emprise
    Is greater than we knew. Eye hath not seen,
    Ear hath not heard what came across the dark
    Last night, as there anointed with that blood
    I knelt and saw the wonder that should be.
    I saw new heavens of freedom, a new earth
    Released from all old tyrannies. I saw
    The brotherhood of man, for which we rode,
    Most ignorant of the splendour of our spears,
    Against the crimson dynasties of Spain.
    Mother of freedom, home and hope and love,
    Our little island, far, how far away,
    I saw thee shatter the whole world of hate,
    I saw the sunrise on thy helmet flame
    With new-born hope for all the world in thee!
    Come now, to sea, to sea!"

                                And ere they knew
    What power impelled them, with one mighty cry
    They lifted up their hearts to the new dawn
    And hastened down the shores and launched the boats,
    And in the fierce white out-draught of the waves
    Thrust with their brandished oars and the boats leapt
    Out, and they settled at the groaning thwarts,
    And the white water boiled before their blades,
    As, with Drake's iron hand upon the helm,
    His own boat led the way; and ere they knew
    What power as of a wind bore them along,
    Anchor was up, their hands were on the sheets,
    The sails were broken out and that small squadron
    Was flying like a sea-bird to the South.
    Now to the strait Magellanus they came,
    And entered in with ringing shouts of joy.
    Nor did they think there, was a fairer strait
    In all the world than this which lay so calm
    Between great silent mountains crowned with snow,
    Unutterably lonely. Marvellous
    The pomp of dawn and sunset on those heights,
    And like a strange new sacrilege the advance
    Of prows that ploughed that time-forgotten tide.
    But soon rude flaws, cross currents, tortuous channels
    Bewildered them, and many a league they drove
    As down some vaster Acheron, while the coasts
    With wailing voices cursed them all night long,
    And once again the hideous fires leapt red
    By many a grim wrenched crag and gaunt ravine.
    So for a hundred leagues of whirling spume
    They groped, till suddenly, far away, they saw
    Full of the sunset, like a cup of gold,
    The purple Westward portals of the strait.
    Onward o'er roughening waves they plunged and reached
    _Capo Desiderato_, where they saw
    What seemed stupendous in that lonely place,--
    Gaunt, black, and sharp as death against the sky
    The Cross, the great black Cross on Cape Desire,
    Which dead Magellan raised upon the height
    To guide, or so he thought, his wandering ships,
    Not knowing they had left him to his doom,
    Not knowing how with tears, with tears of joy,
    Rapture, and terrible triumph, and deep awe,
    Another should come voyaging and read
    Unutterable glories in that sign;
    While his rough seamen raised their mighty shout
    And, once again, before his wondering eyes,
    League upon league of awful burnished gold,
    Rolled the unknown immeasurable sea.

    Now, in those days, as even Magellan held,
    Men thought that Southward of the strait there swept
    Firm land up to the white Antarticke Pole,
    Which now not far they deemed. But when Drake passed
    From out the strait to take his Northward way
    Up the Pacific coast, a great head-wind
    Suddenly smote them; and the heaving seas
    Bulged all around them into billowy hills,
    Dark rolling mountains, whose majestic crests
    Like wild white flames far-blown and savagely flickering
    Swept through the clouds; and on their sullen slopes
    Like wind-whipt withered leaves those little ships,
    Now hurtled to the Zenith and now plunged
    Down into bottomless gulfs, were suddenly scattered
    And whirled away. Drake, on the _Golden Hynde_,
    One moment saw them near him, soaring up
    Above him on the huge o'erhanging billows
    As if to crash down on his poop; the next,
    A mile of howling sea had swept between
    Each of those wind-whipt straws, and they were gone
    Through roaring deserts of embattled death,
    Where, like a hundred thousand chariots charged
    With lightnings and with thunders, one great wave
    Leading the unleashed ocean down the storm
    Hurled them away to Southward.

                                    One last glimpse
    Drake caught o' the _Marygold_, when some mighty vortex
    Wide as the circle of the wide sea-line
    Swept them together again. He saw her staggering
    With mast snapt short and wreckage-tangled deck
    Where men like insects clung. He saw the waves
    Leap over her mangled hulk, like wild white wolves,
    Volleying out of the clouds down dismal steeps
    Of green-black water. Like a wounded steed
    Quivering upon its haunches, up she heaved
    Her head to throw them off. Then, in one mass
    Of fury crashed the great deep over her,
    Trampling her down, down into the nethermost pit,
    As with a madman's wrath. She rose no more,
    And in the stream of the ocean's hurricane laughter
    The _Golden Hynde_ went hurtling to the South,
    With sails rent into ribbons and her mast
    Snapt like a twig. Yea, where Magellan thought
    Firm land had been, the little _Golden Hynde_
    Whirled like an autumn leaf through league on league
    Of bursting seas, chaos on crashing chaos,
    A rolling wilderness of charging Alps
    That shook the world with their tremendous war;
    Grim beetling cliffs that grappled with clamorous gulfs,
    Valleys that yawned to swallow the wide heaven;
    Immense white-flowering fluctuant precipices,
    And hills that swooped down at the throat of hell;
    From Pole to Pole, one blanching bursting storm
    Of world-wide oceans, where the huge Pacific
    Roared greetings to the Atlantic and both swept
    In broad white cataracts, league on struggling league,
    Pursuing and pursued, immeasurable,
    With Titan hands grasping the rent black sky
    East, West, North, South. Then, then was battle indeed
    Of midget men upon that wisp of grass
    The _Golden Hynde_, who, as her masts crashed, hung
    Clearing the tiny wreckage from small decks
    With ant-like weapons. Not their captain's voice
    Availed them now amidst the deafening thunder
    Of seas that felt the heavy hand of God,
    Only they saw across the blinding spume
    In steely flashes, grand and grim, a face,
    Like the last glimmer of faith among mankind,
    Calm in this warring universe, where Drake
    Stood, lashed to his post, beside the helm. Black seas
    Buffeted him. Half-stunned he dashed away
    The sharp brine from his eagle eyes and turned
    To watch some mountain-range come rushing down
    As if to o'erwhelm them utterly. Once, indeed,
    Welkin and sea were one black wave, white-fanged,
    White-crested, and up-heaped so mightily
    That, though it coursed more swiftly than a herd
    Of Titan steeds upon some terrible plain
    Nigh the huge City of Ombos, yet it seemed
    Most strangely slow, with all those crumbling crests
    Each like a cataract on a mountain-side,
    And moved with the steady majesty of doom
    High over him. One moment's flash of fear,
    And yet not fear, but rather life's regret,
    Felt Drake, then laughed a low deep laugh of joy
    Such as men taste in battle; yea, 'twas good
    To grapple thus with death; one low deep laugh,
    One mutter as of a lion about to spring,
    Then burst that thunder o'er him. Height o'er height
    The heavens rolled down, and waves were all the world.

    Meanwhile, in England, dreaming of her sailor,
    Far off, his heart's bride waited, of a proud
    And stubborn house the bright and gracious flower.
    Whom oft her father urged with scanty grace
    That Drake was dead and she had best forget
    The fellow, he grunted. For her father's heart
    Was fettered with small memories, mocked by all
    The greater world's traditions and the trace
    Of earth's low pedigree among the suns,
    Ringed with the terrible twilight of the Gods,
    Ringed with the blood-red dusk of dying nations,
    His faith was in his grandam's mighty skirt,
    And, in that awful consciousness of power,
    Had it not been that even in this he feared
    To sully her silken flounce or farthingale
    Wi' the white dust on his hands, he would have chalked
    To his own shame, thinking it shame, the word
    Nearest to God in its divine embrace
    Of agonies and glories, the dread word
    _Demos_ across that door in Nazareth
    Whence came the prentice carpenter whose voice
    Hath shaken kingdoms down, whose menial gibbet
    Rises triumphant o'er the wreck of Empires
    And stretches out its arms amongst the Stars.
    But she, his daughter, only let her heart
    Loveably forge a charter for her love,
    Cheat her false creed with faithful faery dreams
    That wrapt her love in mystery; thought, perchance,
    He came of some unhappy noble race
    Ruined in battle for some lost high cause.
    And, in the general mixture of men's blood,
    Her dream was truer than his whose bloodless pride
    Urged her to wed the chinless moon-struck fool
    Sprung from five hundred years of idiocy
    Who now besought her hand; would force her bear
    Some heir to a calf's tongue and a coronet,
    Whose cherished taints of blood will please his friends
    With "Yea, Sir William's first-born hath the freak,
    The family freak, being embryonic. Yea,
    And with a fine half-wittedness, forsooth.
    Praise God, our children's children yet shall see
    The lord o' the manor muttering to himself
    At midnight by the gryphon-guarded gates,
    Or gnawing his nails in desolate corridors,
    Or pacing moonlit halls, dagger in hand,
    Waiting to stab his father's pitiless ghost."
    So she--the girl--Sweet Bess of Sydenham,
    Most innocently proud, was prouder yet
    Than thus to let her heart stoop to the lure
    Of lording lovers, though her unstained soul
    Slumbered amidst those dreams as in old tales
    The princess in the enchanted forest sleeps
    Till the prince wakes her with a kiss and draws
    The far-flung hues o' the gleaming magic web
    Into one heart of flame. And now, for Drake,
    She slept like Brynhild in a ring of fire
    Which he must pass to win her. For the wrath
    Of Spain now flamed, awaiting his return,
    All round the seas of home; and even the Queen
    Elizabeth flinched, as that tremendous Power
    Menaced the heart of England, flinched and vowed
    Drake's head to Spain's ambassadors, though still
    By subtlety she hoped to find some way
    Later to save or warn him ere he came.
    Perchance too, nay, most like, he will be slain
    Or even now lies dead, out in the West,
    She thought, and then the promise works no harm.
    But, day by day, there came as on the wings
    Of startled winds from o'er the Spanish Main,
    Strange echoes as of sacked and clamouring ports
    And battered gates of fabulous golden cities,
    A murmur out of the sunset of Peru,
    A sea-bird's wail from Lima. While no less
    The wrathful menace gathered up its might
    All round our little isle; till now the King
    Philip of Spain half secretly decreed
    The building of huge docks from which to launch
    A Fleet Invincible that should sweep the seas
    Of all the world, throttle with one broad grasp
    All Protestant rebellion, having stablished
    His red feet in the Netherlands, thence to hurl
    His whole World-Empire at this little isle,
    England, our mother, home and hope and love,
    And bend her neck beneath his yoke. For now
    No half surrender sought he. At his back,
    Robed with the scarlet of a thousand martyrs,
    Admonishing him, stood Rome, and, in her hand,
    Grasping the Cross of Christ by its great hilt,
    She pointed it, like a dagger, tow'rds the throat
    Of England.

                  One long year, two years had passed
    Since Drake set sail from grey old Plymouth Sound;
    And in those woods of faery wonder still
    Slumbered his love in steadfast faith. But now
    With louder lungs her father urged--"He is dead:
    Forget him. There is one that loves you, seeks
    Your hand in marriage, and he is a goodly match
    E'en for my daughter. You shall wed him, Bess!"
    But when the new-found lover came to woo,
    Glancing in summer silks and radiant hose,
    Whipt doublet and enormous pointed shoon,
    She played him like a fish and sent him home
    Spluttering with dismay, a stickleback
    Discoloured, a male minnow of dimpled streams
    With all his rainbows paling in the prime,
    To hide amongst his lilies, while once more
    She took her casement seat that overlooked
    The sea and read in Master Spenser's book,
    Which Francis gave "To my dear lady and queen
    Bess," that most rare processional of love--
    "_Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song!_"
    Yet did her father urge her day by day,
    And day by day her mother dinned her ears
    With petty saws, as--"When _I_ was a girl,"
    And "I remember what _my_ father said,"
    And "Love, oh feather-fancies plucked from geese
    You call your poets!" Yet she hardly meant
    To slight true love, save in her daughter's heart;
    For the old folk ever find it hard to see
    The passion of their children. When it wakes,
    The child becomes a stranger. So with Bess;
    But since her soul still slumbered, and the moons
    Rolled on and blurred her soul's particular love
    With the vague unknown impulse of her youth,
    Her brave resistance often melted now
    In tears, and her will weakened day by day;
    Till on a dreadful summer morn there came,
    Borne by a wintry flaw, home to the Thames,
    A bruised and battered ship, all that was left,
    So said her crew, of Drake's ill-fated fleet.
    John Wynter, her commander, told the tale
    Of how the _Golden Hynde_ and _Marygold_
    Had by the wind Euroclydon been driven
    Sheer o'er the howling edges of the world;
    Of how himself by God's good providence
    Was hurled into the strait Magellanus;
    Of how on the horrible frontiers of the Void
    He had watched in vain, lit red with beacon-fires
    The desperate coasts o' the black abyss, whence none
    Ever returned, though many a week he watched
    Beneath the Cross; and only saw God's wrath
    Burn through the heavens and devastate the mountains,
    And hurl unheard of oceans roaring down
    After the lost ships in one cataract
    Of thunder and splendour and fury and rolling doom.

    Then, with a bitter triumph in his face,
    As if this were the natural end of all
    Such vile plebeians, as if he had foreseen it,
    As if himself had breathed a tactful hint
    Into the aristocratic ears of God,
    Her father broke the last frail barriers down,
    Broke the poor listless will o' the lonely girl,
    Who careless now of aught but misery
    Promised to wed their lordling. Mighty speed
    They made to press that loveless marriage on;
    And ere the May had mellowed into June
    Her marriage eve had come. Her cold hands held
    Drake's gift. She scarce could see her name, writ broad
    By that strong hand as it was, _To my queen Bess_.
    She looked out through her casement o'er the sea,
    Listening its old enchanted moan, which seemed
    Striving to speak, she knew not what. Its breath
    Fluttered the roses round the grey old walls,
    And shook the ghostly jasmine. A great moon
    Hung like a red lamp in the sycamore.
    A corn-crake in the hay-fields far away
    Chirped like a cricket, and the night-jar churred
    His passionate love-song. Soft-winged moths besieged
    Her lantern. Under many a star-stabbed elm
    The nightingale began his golden song,
    Whose warm thick notes are each a drop of blood
    From that small throbbing breast against the thorn
    Pressed close to turn the white rose into red;
    Even as her lawn-clad may-white bosom pressed
    Quivering against the bars, while her dark hair
    Streamed round her shoulders and her small bare feet
    Gleamed in the dusk. Then spake she to her maid--
    "I cannot sleep, I cannot sleep to-night.
    Bring thy lute hither and sing. Alison, think you
    The dead can watch us from their distant world?
    Can our dead friends be near us when we weep?
    I wish 'twere so! for then my love would come,
    No matter then how far, my love would come,
    And he'd forgive me."

    Then Bess bowed down her lovely head: her breast
    Heaved with short sobs, sickening at the heart,
    She grasped the casement moaning, "Love, Love, Love,
    Come quickly, come, before it is too late,
    Come quickly, oh come quickly."
                                        Then her maid
    Slipped a soft arm around her and gently drew
    The supple quivering body, shaken with sobs,
    And all that firm young, sweetness to her breast,
    And led her to her couch, and all night long
    She watched beside her, till the marriage morn
    Blushed in the heartless East. Then swiftly flew
    The pitiless moments, till--as in a dream--
    And borne along by dreams, or like a lily
    Cut from its anchorage in the stream to glide
    Down the smooth bosom of an unknown world
    Through fields of unknown blossom, so moved Bess
    Amongst her maids, as the procession passed
    Forth to the little church upon the cliffs,
    And, as in those days was the bridal mode,
    Her lustrous hair in billowing beauty streamed
    Dishevelled o'er her shoulders, while the sun
    Caressed her bent and glossy head, and shone
    Over the deep blue, white-flaked, wrinkled sea,
    On full-blown rosy-petalled sails that flashed
    Like flying blossoms fallen from her crown.


BOOK V


    I

    _With the fruit of Aladdin's garden clustering thick in her hold,
    With rubies awash in her scuppers and her bilge ablaze with gold,
    A world in arms behind her to sever her heart from home,
    The_ Golden Hynde _drove onward over the glittering foam._


    II

    _If we go as we came, by the Southward, we meet wi' the fleets of Spain!
    'Tis a thousand to one against us: we'll turn to the West again!
    We have captured a China pilot, his charts and his golden keys:
    We'll sail to the golden Gateway, over the golden seas._

    Over the immeasurable molten gold
    Wrapped in a golden haze, onward they drew;
    And now they saw the tiny purple quay
    Grow larger and darker and brighten into brown
    Across the swelling sparkle of the waves.
    Brown on the quay, a train of tethered mules
    Munched at the nose-bags, while a Spaniard drowsed
    On guard beside what seemed at first a heap
    Of fish, then slowly turned to silver bars
    Up-piled and glistering in the enchanted sun.
    Nor did that sentry wake as, like a dream,
    The _Golden Hynde_ divided the soft sleep
    Of warm green lapping water, sidled up,
    Sank sail, and moored beside the quay. But Drake,
    Lightly leaping ashore and stealing nigh,
    Picked up the Spaniard's long gay-ribboned gun
    Close to his ear. At once, without a sound,
    The watchman opened his dark eyes and stared
    As at strange men who suddenly had come,
    Borne by some magic carpet, from the stars;
    Then, with a courtly bow, his right hand thrust
    Within the lace embroideries of his breast.
    Politely Drake, with pained apologies
    For this disturbance of a cavalier
    Napping on guard, straightway resolved to make
    Complete amends, by now relieving him
    Of these--which doubtless troubled his repose--
    These anxious bars of silver. With that word
    Two seamen leaped ashore and, gathering up
    The bars in a stout old patch of tawny sail,
    Slung them aboard. No sooner this was done
    Than out o' the valley, like a foolish jest
    Out of the mouth of some great John-a-dreams,
    In soft procession of buffoonery
    A woolly train of llamas proudly came
    Stepping by two and two along the quay,
    Laden with pack on pack of silver bars
    And driven by a Spaniard. His amaze
    The seamen greeted with profuser thanks
    For his most punctual thought and opportune
    Courtesy. None the less they must avouch
    It pained them much to see a cavalier
    Turned carrier; and, at once, they must insist
    On easing him of that too sordid care.

       *   *   *   *

    Then out from Tarapaca once again
    They sailed, their hold a glimmering mine of wealth,
    Towards Arica and Lima, where they deemed
    The prize of prizes waited unaware.
    For every year a gorgeous galleon sailed
    With all the harvest of Potosi's mines
    And precious stones from dead king's diadems,
    Aztecs' and Incas' gem-encrusted crowns,
    Pearls from the glimmering Temples of the Moon,
    Rich opals with their milky rainbow-clouds,
    White diamonds from the Temples of the Sun,
    Carbuncles flaming scarlet, amethysts,
    Rubies, and sapphires; these to Spain she brought
    To glut her priestly coffers. Now not far
    Ahead they deemed she lay upon that coast,
    Crammed with the lustrous Indies, wrung with threat
    And torture from the naked Indian slaves.
    To him that spied her top-sails first a prize
    Drake offered of the wondrous chain he wore;
    And every seaman, every ship-boy, watched
    Not only for the prize, but for their friends,
    If haply these had weathered through the storm.
    Nor did they know their friends had homeward turned,
    Bearing to England and to England's Queen,
    And his heart's queen, the tale that Drake was dead.

    Northward they cruised along a warm, wild coast
    That like a most luxurious goddess drowsed
    Supine to heaven, her arms behind her head,
    One knee up-thrust to make a mountain-peak,
    Her rosy breasts up-heaving their soft snow
    In distant Andes, and her naked side
    With one rich curve for half a hundred leagues
    Bathed by the creaming foam; her heavy hair
    Fraught with the perfume of a thousand forests
    Tossed round about her beauty: and her mouth
    A scarlet mystery of distant flower
    Up-turned to take the kisses of the sun.
    But like a troop of boys let loose from school
    The adventurers went by, startling the stillness
    Of that voluptuous dream-encumbered shore
    With echoing shouts of laughter and alien song.

    But as they came to Arica, from afar
    They heard the clash of bells upon the breeze,
    And knew that Rumour with her thousand wings
    Had rushed before them. Horsemen in the night
    Had galloped through the white coast-villages
    And spread the dreadful cry "El Draque!" abroad,
    And when the gay adventurers drew nigh
    They found the quays deserted, and the ships
    All flown, except one little fishing-boat
    Wherein an old man like a tortoise moved
    A wrinkled head above the rusty net
    His crawling hands repaired. He seemed to dwell
    Outside the world of war and peace, outside
    Everything save his daily task, and cared
    No whit who else might win or lose; for all
    The pilot asked of him without demur
    He answered, scarcely looking from his work.
    A galleon laden with eight hundred bars
    Of silver, not three hours ago had flown
    Northward, he muttered. Ere the words were out,
    The will of Drake thrilled through the _Golden Hynde_
    Like one sharp trumpet-call, and ere they knew
    What power impelled them, crowding on all sail
    Northward they surged, and roaring down the wind
    At Chiuli, port of Arequipa, saw
    The chase at anchor. Wondering they came
    With all the gunners waiting at their guns
    Bare-armed and silent--nearer, nearer yet,--
    Close to the enemy. But no sight or sound
    Of living creature stirred upon her decks.
    Only a great grey cat lay in the sun
    Upon a warm smooth cannon-butt. A chill
    Ran through the veins of even the boldest there
    At that too peaceful silence. Cautiously
    Drake neared her in his pinnace: cautiously,
    Cutlass in hand, up that mysterious hull
    He clomb, and wondered, as he climbed, to breathe
    The friendly smell o' the pitch and hear the waves
    With their incessant old familiar sound
    Crackling and slapping against her windward flank.
    A ship of dreams was that; for when they reached
    The silent deck, they saw no crouching forms,
    They heard no sound of life. Only the hot
    Creak of the cordage whispered in the sun.
    The cat stood up and yawned, and slunk away
    Slowly, with furtive glances. The great hold
    Was empty, and the rich cabin stripped and bare.
    Suddenly one of the seamen with a cry
    Pointed where, close inshore, a little boat
    Stole towards the town; and, with a louder cry,
    Drake bade his men aboard the _Golden Hynde_.
    Scarce had they pulled two hundred yards away
    When, with a roar that seemed to buffet the heavens
    And rip the heart of the sea out, one red flame
    Blackened with fragments, the great galleon burst
    Asunder! All the startled waves were strewn
    With wreckage; and Drake laughed--
    "My lads, we have diced
    With death to-day, and won! My merry lads,
    It seems that Spain is bolting with the stakes!
    Now, if I have to stretch the skies for sails
    And summon the blasts of God up from the South
    To fill my canvas, I will overhaul
    Those dusky devils with the treasure-ship
    That holds our hard-earned booty. Pull hard all,
    Hard for the _Golden Hynde_."

       *   *   *   *

                                    And so they came
    At dead of night on Callao de Lima!
    They saw the harbour lights across the waves
    Glittering, and the shadowy hulks of ships
    Gathered together like a flock of sheep
    Within the port. With shouts and clink of chains
    A shadowy ship was entering from the North,
    And like the shadow of that shadow slipped
    The _Golden Hynde_ beside her thro' the gloom;
    And side by side they anchored in the port
    Amidst the shipping! Over the dark tide
    A small boat from the customs-house drew near.
    A sleepy, yawning, gold-laced officer
    Boarded the _Golden Hynde_, and with a cry,
    Stumbling against a cannon-butt, he saw
    The bare-armed British seamen in the gloom
    All waiting by their guns. Wildly he plunged
    Over the side and urged his boat away,
    Crying, "El Draque! El Draque!" At that dread word
    The darkness filled with clamour, and the ships,
    Cutting their cables, drifted here and there
    In mad attempts to seek the open sea.
    Wild lights burnt hither and thither, and all the port,
    One furnace of confusion, heaved and seethed
    In terror; for each shadow of the night,
    Nay, the great night itself, was all _El Draque_.
    The Dragon's wings were spread from quay to quay,
    The very lights that burnt from mast to mast
    And flared across the tide kindled his breath
    To fire; while here and there a British pinnace
    Slipped softly thro' the roaring gloom and glare,
    Ransacking ship by ship; for each one thought
    A fleet had come upon them. Each gave up
    The struggle as each was boarded; while, elsewhere,
    Cannon to cannon, friends bombarded friends.

    Yet not one ounce of treasure in Callao
    They found; for, fourteen days before they came,
    That greatest treasure-ship of Spain, with all
    The gorgeous harvest of that year, had sailed
    For Panama: her ballast--silver bars;
    Her cargo--rubies, emeralds, and gold.

    Out through the clamour and the darkness, out,
    Out to the harbour mouth, the _Golden Hynde_,
    Steered by the iron soul of Drake, returned:
    And where the way was blocked, her cannon clove
    A crimson highway to the midnight sea.
    Then Northward, Northward, o'er the jewelled main,
    Under the white moon like a storm they drove
    In quest of the _Cacafuego_. Fourteen days
    Her start was; and at dawn the fair wind sank,
    And chafing lay the _Golden Hynde_, becalmed;
    While, on the hills, the Viceroy of Peru
    Marched down from Lima with two thousand men,
    And sent out four huge ships of war to sink
    Or capture the fierce Dragon. Loud laughed Drake
    To see them creeping nigh, urged with great oars,
    Then suddenly pause; for none would be the first
    To close with him. And, ere they had steeled their hearts
    To battle, a fair breeze broke out anew,
    And Northward sped the little _Golden Hynde_
    In quest of the lordliest treasure-ship of Spain.

       *   *   *   *

    Behind her lay a world in arms; for now
    Wrath and confusion clamoured for revenge
    From sea to sea. Spain claimed the pirate's head
    From England, and awaited his return
    With all her tortures. And where'er he passed
    He sowed the dragon's teeth, and everywhere
    Cadmean broods of armèd men arose
    And followed, followed on his fiery trail.
    Men toiled at Lima to fit out a fleet
    Grim enough to destroy him. All night long
    The flare went up from cities on the coast
    Where men like naked devils toiled to cast
    Cannon that might have overwhelmed the powers
    Of Michael when he drave that hideous rout
    Through livid chaos to the black abyss.
    Small hope indeed there seemed of safe return;
    But Northward sped the little _Golden Hynde_,
    The world-watched midget ship of eighteen guns,
    Undaunted; and upon the second dawn
    Sighted a galleon, not indeed the chase,
    Yet worth a pause; for out of her they took--
    Embossed with emeralds large as pigeon's eggs--
    A golden crucifix, with eighty pounds
    In weight of gold. The rest they left behind;
    And onward, onward, to the North they flew--
    A score of golden miles, a score of green,
    An hundred miles, eight hundred miles of foam,
    Rainbows and fire, ransacking as they went
    Ship after ship for news o' the chase and gold;
    Learning from every capture that they drew
    Nearer and nearer. At Truxillo, dim
    And dreaming city, a-drowse with purple flowers,
    She had paused, ay, paused to take a freight of gold!
    At Paita--she had passed two days in front,
    Only two days, two days ahead; nay, one!
    At Quito, close inshore, a youthful page,
    Bright-eyed, ran up the rigging and cried, "A sail!
    A sail! The _Cacafuego_! And the chain
    Is mine!" And by the strange cut of her sails,
    Whereof they had been told in Callao,
    They knew her!
                          Heavily laden with her gems,
    Lazily drifting with her golden fruitage,
    Over the magic seas they saw her hull
    Loom as they onward drew; but Drake, for fear
    The prey might take alarm and run ashore,
    Trailed wine-skins, filled with water, over the side
    To hold his ship back, till the darkness fell,
    And with the night the off-shore wind arose.
    At last the sun sank down, the rosy light
    Faded from Andes' peaked and bosomed snow:
    The night-wind rose: the wine-skins were up-hauled;
    And, like a hound unleashed, the _Golden Hynde_
    Leapt forward thro' the gloom.
                                         A cable's length
    Divided them. The _Cacafuego_ heard
    A rough voice in the darkness bidding her
    _Heave to!_ She held her course. Drake gave the word.
    A broadside shattered the night, and over her side
    Her main-yard clattered like a broken wing!
    On to her decks the British sea-dogs swarmed,
    Cutlass in hand: that fight was at an end.

    The ship was cleared, a prize crew placed a-board,
    Then both ships turned their heads to the open sea.
    At dawn, being out of sight of land, they 'gan
    Examine the great prize. None ever knew
    Save Drake and Gloriana what wild wealth
    They had captured there. Thus much at least was known:
    An hundredweight of gold, and twenty tons
    Of silver bullion; thirteen chests of coins;
    Nuggets of gold unnumbered; countless pearls,
    Diamonds, emeralds; but the worth of these
    Was past all reckoning. In the crimson dawn,
    Ringed with the lonely pomp of sea and sky,
    The naked-footed seamen bathed knee-deep
    In gold and gathered up Aladdin's fruit--
    All-colored gems--and tossed them in the sun.
    The hold like one great elfin orchard gleamed
    With dusky globes and tawny glories piled,
    Hesperian apples, heap on mellow heap,
    Rich with the hues of sunset, rich and ripe
    And ready for the enchanted cider-press;
    An Emperor's ransom in each burning orb;
    A kingdom's purchase in each clustered bough;
    The freedom of all slaves in every chain.


BOOK VI

    Now like the soul of Ophir on the sea
    Glittered the _Golden Hynde_, and all her heart
    Turned home to England. As a child that finds
    A ruby ring upon the highway, straight
    Homeward desires to run with it, so she
    Yearned for her home and country. Yet the world
    Was all in arms behind her. Fleet on fleet
    Awaited her return. Along the coast
    The very churches melted down their chimes
    And cast them into cannon. To the South
    A thousand cannon watched Magellan's straits,
    And fleets were scouring all the sea like hounds,
    With orders that where'er they came on Drake,
    Although he were the Dragon of their dreams,
    They should out-blast his thunders and convey,
    Dead or alive, his body back to Spain.

    And Drake laughed out and said, "My trusty lads
    Of Devon, you have made the wide world ring
    With England's name; you have swept one half the seas
    From sky to sky; and in our oaken hold
    You have packed the gorgeous Indies. We shall sail
    But slowly with such wealth. If we return,
    We are one against ten thousand! We will seek
    The fabled Northern passage, take our gold
    Safe home; then out to sea again and try
    Our guns against their guns."

       *   *   *   *

                               And as they sailed
    Northward, they swooped on warm blue Guatulco
    For food and water. Nigh the dreaming port
    The grand alcaldes in high conclave sat,
    Blazing with gold and scarlet, as they tried
    A batch of negro slaves upon the charge
    Of idleness in Spanish mines; dumb slaves,
    With bare scarred backs and labour-broken knees,
    And sorrowful eyes like those of wearied kine
    Spent from the ploughing. Even as the judge
    Rose to condemn them to the knotted lash
    The British boat's crew, quiet and compact,
    Entered the court. The grim judicial glare
    Grew wider with amazement, and the judge
    Staggered against his gilded throne.
                                          "I thank
    Almighty God," cried Drake, "who hath given me this
    --That I who once, in ignorance, procured
    Slaves for the golden bawdy-house of Spain,
    May now, in England's name, help to requite
    That wrong. For now I say in England's name,
    Where'er her standard flies, the slave shall stand
    Upright, the shackles fall from off his limbs.
    Unyoke the prisoners: tell them they are men
    Once more, not beasts of burden. Set them free;
    But take these gold and scarlet popinjays
    Aboard my _Golden Hynde_; and let them write
    An order that their town shall now provide
    My boats with food and water."
                                      This being done,
    The slaves being placed in safety on the prize,
    The _Golden Hynde_ revictualled and the casks
    Replenished with fresh water, Drake set free
    The judges and swept Northward once again;
    And, off the coast of Nicaragua, found
    A sudden treasure better than all gold;
    For on the track of the China trade they caught
    A ship whereon two China pilots sailed,
    And in their cabin lay the secret charts,
    Red hieroglyphs of Empire, unknown charts
    Of silken sea-roads down the golden West
    Where all roads meet and East and West are one.
    And, with that mystery stirring in their hearts
    Like a strange cry from home, Northward they swept
    And Northward, till the soft luxurious coasts
    Hardened, the winds grew bleak, the great green waves
    Loomed high like mountains round them, and the spray
    Froze on their spars and yards. Fresh from the warmth
    Of tropic seas the men could hardly brook
    That cold; and when the floating hills of ice
    Like huge green shadows crowned with ghostly snow
    Went past them with strange whispers in the gloom,
    Or took mysterious colours in the dawn,
    Their hearts misgave them, and they found no way;
    But all was iron shore and icy sea.
    And one by one the crew fell sick to death
    In that fierce winter, and the land still ran
    Westward and showed no passage. Tossed with storms,
    Onward they plunged, or furrowed gentler tides
    Of ice-lit emerald that made the prow
    A faery beak of some enchanted ship
    Flinging wild rainbows round her as she drove
    Thro' seas unsailed by mortal mariners,
    Past isles unhailed of any human voice,
    Where sound and silence mingled in one song
    Of utter solitude. Ever as they went
    The flag of England blazoned the broad breeze,
    Northward, where never ship had sailed before,
    Northward, till lost in helpless wonderment,
    Dazed as a soul awakening from the dream
    Of death to some wild dawn in Paradise
    (Yet burnt with cold as they whose very tears
    Freeze on their faces where Cocytus wails)
    All world-worn, bruised, wing-broken, wracked, and wrenched,
    Blackened with lightning, scarred as with evil deeds,
    But all embalmed in beauty by that sun
    Which never sets, bosomed in peace at last
    The _Golden Hynde_ rocked on a glittering calm.
    Seas that no ship had ever sailed, from sky
    To glistening sky, swept round them. Glory and gleam,
    Glamour and lucid rapture and diamond air
    Embraced her broken spars, begrimed with gold
    Her gloomy hull, rocking upon a sphere
    New made, it seemed, mysterious with the first
    Mystery of the world, where holy sky
    And sacred sea shone like the primal Light
    Of God, a-stir with whispering sea-bird's wings
    And glorious with clouds. Only, all day,
    All night, the rhythmic utterance of His will
    In the deep sigh of seas that washed His throne,
    Rose and relapsed across Eternity,
    Timed to the pulse of æons. All their world
    Seemed strange as unto us the great new heavens
    And glittering shores, if on some aery bark
    To Saturn's coasts we came and traced no more
    The tiny gleam of our familiar earth
    Far off, but heard tremendous oceans roll
    Round unimagined continents, and saw
    Terrible mountains unto which our Alps
    Were less than mole-hills, and such gaunt ravines
    Cleaving them and such cataracts roaring down
    As burst the gates of our earth-moulded senses,
    Pour the eternal glory on our souls,
    And, while ten thousand chariots bring the dawn,
    Hurl us poor midgets trembling to our knees.
    Glory and glamour and rapture of lucid air,
    Ice cold, with subtle colours of the sky
    Embraced her broken spars, belted her hulk
    With brilliance, while she dipped her jacinth beak
    In waves of mounded splendour, and sometimes
    A great ice-mountain flashed and floated by
    Throned on the waters, pinnacled and crowned
    With all the smouldering jewels in the world;
    Or in the darkness, glimmering berg on berg,
    All emerald to the moon, went by like ghosts
    Whispering to the South.
                                 There, as they lay,
    Waiting a wind to fill the stiffened sails,
    Their hearts remembered that in England now
    The Spring was nigh, and in that lonely sea
    The skilled musicians filled their eyes with home.


SONG

    I

    _It is the Spring-tide now!
    Under the hawthorn-bough
      The milkmaid goes:
    Her eyes are violets blue
    Washed with the morning dew,
      Her mouth a rose.
        It is the Spring-tide now._


    II

    _The lanes are growing sweet,
    The lambkins frisk and bleat
      In all the meadows:
    The glossy dappled kine
    Blink in the warm sunshine,
      Cooling their shadows.
        It is the Spring-tide now._


    III

    _Soon hand in sunburnt hand
    Thro' God's green fairyland,
      England, our home,
    Whispering as they stray
    Adown the primrose way,
      Lovers will roam.
        It is the Spring-tide now._

    And then, with many a chain of linkèd sweetness,
    Harmonious gold, they drew their hearts and souls
    Back, back to England, thoughts of wife and child,
    Mother and sweetheart and the old companions,
    The twisted streets of London and the deep
    Delight of Devon lanes, all softly voiced
    In words or cadences, made them breathe hard
    And gaze across the everlasting sea,
    Craving for that small isle so far away.


SONG

    I

    _O, you beautiful land,
      Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright
        With the flowery largesse of May
    Sweet from the palm of her hand
      Out-flung, till the hedges grew white
        As the green-arched billows with spray._


    II

    White from the fall of her feet
      The daisies awake in the sun!
        Cliff-side and valley and plain
    With the breath of the thyme growing sweet
      Laugh, for the Spring is begun;
        And Love hath turned homeward again.

            _O, you beautiful land!_


    III

    Where should the home be of Love,
      But there, where the hawthorn-tree blows,
        And the milkmaid trips out with her pail,
    And the skylark in heaven above
      Sings, till the West is a rose
        And the East is a nightingale?

            _O, you beautiful land!_


    IV

    There where the sycamore trees
      Are shading the satin-skinned kine,
        And oaks, whose brethren of old
    Conquered the strength of the seas,
      Grow broad in the sunlight and shine
        Crowned with their cressets of gold;

            _O, you beautiful land!_


    V

    Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright
      With rose-coloured cloudlets above;
        Billowing broad and grand
    Where the meadows with blossom are white
      For the foot-fall, the foot-fall of Love.
        O, you beautiful land!


    VI

    How should we sing of thy beauty,
      England, mother of men,
        We that can look in thine eyes
    And see there the splendour of duty
      Deep as the depth of their ken,
        Wide as the ring of thy skies.


    VII

    _O, you beautiful land,
      Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright
        With the flowery largesse of May
    Sweet from the palm of her hand
      Out-flung, till the hedges grew white
        As the green-arched billows with spray,
            O, you beautiful land!_

    And when a fair wind rose again, there seemed
    No hope of passage by that fabled way
    Northward, and suddenly Drake put down his helm
    And, with some wondrous purpose in his eyes,
    Turned Southward once again, until he found
    A lonely natural harbour on the coast
    Near San Francisco, where the cliffs were white
    Like those of England, and the soft soil teemed
    With gold. There they careened the _Golden Hynde_--
    Her keel being thick with barnacles and weeds--
    And built a fort and dockyard to refit
    Their little wandering home, not half so large
    As many a coasting barque to-day that scarce
    Would cross the Channel, yet she had swept the seas
    Of half the world, and even now prepared
    For new adventures greater than them all.
    And as the sound of chisel and hammer broke
    The stillness of that shore, shy figures came,
    Keen-faced and grave-eyed Indians, from the woods
    To bow before the strange white-faced newcomers
    As gods. Whereat the chaplain all aghast
    Persuaded them with signs and broken words
    And grunts that even Drake was but a man,
    Whom none the less the savages would crown
    With woven flowers and barbarous ritual
    King of New Albion--so the seamen called
    That land, remembering the white cliffs of home.
    Much they implored, with many a sign and cry,
    Which by the rescued slaves upon the prize
    Were part interpreted, that Drake would stay
    And rule them; and the vision of the great
    Empire of Englishmen arose and flashed
    A moment round them, on that lonely shore.
    A small and weather-beaten band they stood,
    Bronzed seamen by the laughing rescued slaves,
    Ringed with gigantic loneliness and saw
    An Empire that should liberate the world;
    A Power before the lightning of whose arms
    Darkness should die and all oppression cease;
    A Federation of the strong and weak,
    Whereby the weak were strengthened and the strong
    Made stronger in the increasing good of all;
    A gathering up of one another's loads;
    A turning of the wasteful rage of war
    To accomplish large and fruitful tasks of peace,
    Even as the strength of some great stream is turned
    To grind the corn for bread. E'en thus on England
    That splendour dawned which those in dreams foresaw
    And saw not with their living eyes, but thou,
    England, mayst lift up eyes at last and see,
    Who, like that angel of the Apocalypse
    Hast set one foot upon thy sea-girt isle,
    The other upon the waters, and canst raise
    Now, if thou wilt, above the assembled nations,
    The trumpet of deliverance to thy lips.

       *   *   *   *

    At last their task was done, the _Golden Hynde_
    Undocked, her white wings hoisted; and away
    Westward they swiftly glided from the shore
    Where, with a wild lament, their Indian friends,
    Knee-deep i' the creaming foam, all stood at gaze,
    Like men that for one moment in their lives
    Have seen a mighty drama cross their path
    And played upon the stage of vast events
    Knowing, henceforward, all their life is nought.
    But Westward sped the little _Golden Hynde_
    Across the uncharted ocean, with no guide
    But that great homing cry of all their hearts.
    Far out of sight of land they steered, straight out
    Across the great Pacific, in those days
    When even the compass proved no trusty guide,
    Straight out they struck in that small bark, straight out
    Week after week, without one glimpse of aught
    But heaving seas, across the uncharted waste
    Straight to the sunset. Laughingly they sailed,
    With all that gorgeous booty in their holds,
    A splendour dragging deep through seas of doom,
    A prey to the first great hurricane that blew
    Except their God averted it. And still
    Their skilled musicians cheered the way along
    To shores beyond the sunset and the sea.
    And oft at nights, the yellow fo'c'sle lanthorn
    Swung over swarthy singing faces grouped
    Within the four small wooden walls that made
    Their home and shut them from the unfathomable
    Depths of mysterious gloom without that rolled
    All around them; or Tom Moone would heartily troll
    A simple stave that struggled oft with thoughts
    Beyond its reach, yet reached their hearts no less.


SONG


    I

    _Good luck befall you, mariners all
      That sail this world so wide!
    Whither we go, not yet we know:
      We steer by wind and tide,
    Be it right or wrong, I sing this song;
      For now it seems to me
    Men steer their souls thro' rocks and shoals
      As mariners use by sea._

    Chorus: _As mariners use by sea,
                           My lads,
            As mariners use by sea!_


    II

    _And now they plough to windward, now
      They drive before the gale!
    Now are they hurled across the world
      With torn and tattered sail;
    Yet, as they will, they steer and still
      Defy the world's rude glee:
    Till death o'erwhelm them, mast and helm,
      They ride and rule the sea._

    Chorus: _They ride and rule the sea,
                      My lads,
            They ride and rule the sea!_

       *   *   *   *

    Meantime, in England, Bess of Sydenham,
    Drake's love and queen, being told that Drake was dead,
    And numbed with grief, obeying her father's will
    That dreadful summer morn in bridal robes
    Had passed to wed her father's choice. The sun
    Streamed smiling on her as she went, half-dazed,
    Amidst her smiling maids. Nigh to the sea
    The church was, and the mellow marriage bells
    Mixed with its music. Far away, white sails
    Spangled the sapphire, white as flying blossoms
    New-fallen from her crown; but as the glad
    And sad procession neared the little church,
    From some strange ship-of-war, far out at sea,
    There came a sudden tiny puff of smoke--
    And then a dull strange throb, a whistling hiss,
    And scarce a score of yards away a shot
    Ploughed up the turf. None knew, none ever knew
    From whence it came, whether a perilous jest
    Of English seamen, or a wanton deed
    Of Spaniards, or mere accident; but all
    Her maids in flight were scattered. Bess awoke
    As from a dream, crying aloud--"'Tis he,
    'Tis he that sends this message. He is not dead.
    I will not pass the porch. Come home with me.
    'Twas he that sent that message."
                                        Nought availed,
    Her father's wrath, her mother's tears, her maids'
    Cunning persuasions, nought; home she returned,
    And waited for the dead to come to life;
    Nor waited long; for ere that month was out,
    Rumour on rumour reached the coasts of England,
    Borne as it seemed on sea-birds' wings, that Drake
    Was on his homeward way.


BOOK VII

    The imperial wrath of Spain, one world-wide sea
    Of furious pomp and flouted power, now surged
    All round this little isle, with one harsh roar
    Deepening for Drake's return--"The _Golden Hynde_
    Ye swore had foundered, Drake ye swore was drowned;
    They are on their homeward way! The head of Drake!
    What answer, what account, what recompense
    Now can ye yield our might invincible
    Except the head of Drake, whose bloody deeds
    Have reddened the Pacific, who hath sacked
    Cities of gold, burnt fleets, and ruined realms,
    What answer but his life?"
                               To which the Queen
    Who saw the storm of Europe slowly rising
    In awful menace o'er her wave-beat throne,
    And midmost of the storm, the ensanguined robes
    Of Rome and murderous hand, grasping the Cross
    By its great hilt, pointing it like a brand
    Blood-blackened at the throat of England, saw
    Like skeleton castles wrapt in rolling mist
    The monstrous engines and designs of war,
    The secret fleets and brooding panoplies
    Philip prepared, growing from day to day
    In dusk armipotent and embattled gloom
    Surrounding her, replied: "The life of Drake,
    If, on our strict enquiry, in due order
    We find that Drake have hurt our friends, mark well,
    If Drake have hurt our friends, the life of Drake."

       *   *   *   *

    And while the world awaited him, as men
    Might wait an earthquake, quietly one grey morn,
    One grey October morn of mist and rain
    When all the window-panes in Plymouth dripped
    With listless drizzle, and only through her streets
    Rumbled the death-cart with its dreary bell
    Monotonously plangent (for the plague
    Had lately like a vampire sucked the veins
    Of Plymouth town), a little weed-clogged ship,
    Grey as a ghost, glided into the Sound
    And anchored, scarce a soul to see her come,
    And not an eye to read the faded scroll
    Around her battered prow--the _Golden Hynde_.
    Then, thro' the dumb grey misty listless port,
    A rumour like the colours of the dawn
    Streamed o'er the shining quays, up the wet streets,
    In at the tavern doors, flashed from the panes
    And turned them into diamonds, fired the pools
    In every muddy lane with Spanish gold,
    Flushed in a thousand faces, Drake is come!
    Down every crowding alley the urchins leaped
    Tossing their caps, the _Golden Hynde_ is come!
    Fisherman, citizen, prentice, dame and maid,
    Fat justice, floury baker, bloated butcher,
    Fishwife, minister and apothecary,
    Yea, even the driver of the death-cart, leaving
    His ghastly load, using his dreary bell
    To merrier purpose, down the seething streets,
    Panting, tumbling, jostling, helter-skelter
    To the water-side, to the water-side they rushed,
    And some knee-deep beyond it, all one wild
    Welcome to Francis Drake!
    Wild kerchiefs fluttering, thunderous hurrahs
    Rolling from quay to quay, a thousand arms
    Outstretched to that grey ghostly little ship
    At whose masthead the British flag still flew;
    Then, over all, in one tumultuous tide
    Of pealing joy, the Plymouth bells outclashed
    A nation's welcome home to Francis Drake.

    The very _Golden Hynde_, no idle dream,
    The little ship that swept the Spanish Main,
    Carelessly lying there, in Plymouth Sound,
    The _Golden Hynde_, the wonder of the world,
    A glory wrapt her greyness, and no boat
    Dared yet approach, save one, with Drake's close friends,
    Who came to warn him: "England stands alone
    And Drake is made the price of England's peace.
    The Queen, perforce, must temporise with Spain,
    The Invincible! She hath forfeited thy life
    To Spain, against her will. Only by this
    Rejection of thee as a privateer
    She averted instant war; for now the menace
    Of Spain draws nigher, looms darker every hour.
    The world is made Spain's footstool. Philip, the King,
    E'en now hath added to her boundless power
    Without a blow, the vast domains and wealth
    Of Portugal, and deadlier yet, a coast
    That crouches over against us. Cadiz holds
    A huge Armada, none knows where to strike;
    And even this day a flying horseman brought
    Rumours that Spain hath landed a great force
    In Ireland. Mary of Scotland only waits
    The word to stab us in the side for Rome.
    The Queen, weighed down by Burleigh and the friends
    Of peace at any cost, may yet be driven
    To make thy life our ransom, which indeed
    She hath already sworn, or seemed to swear."

    To whom Drake answered, "Gloriana lives;
    And in her life mine only fear lies dead,
    Mine only fear, for England, not myself.
    Willing am I and glad, as I have lived,
    To die for England's sake.
    Yet, lest the Queen be driven now to restore
    This cargo that I bring her--a world's wealth,
    The golden springs of all the power of Spain,
    The jewelled hearts of all those cruel realms
    (For I have plucked them out) beyond the sea;
    Lest she be driven to yield them up again
    For Spain and Spain's delight, I will warp out
    Behind St. Nicholas' Island. The fierce plague
    In Plymouth shall be colour and excuse,
    Until my courier return from court
    With Gloriana's will. If it be death,
    I'll out again to sea, strew its rough floor
    With costlier largesses than kings can throw,
    And, ere I die, will singe the Spaniard's beard
    And set the fringe of his imperial robe
    Blazing along his coasts. Then let him roll
    His galleons round the little _Golden Hynde_,
    Bring her to bay, if he can, on the high seas,
    Ring us about with thousands, we'll not yield,
    I and my _Golden Hynde_, we will go down,
    With flag still flying on the last stump left us
    And all my cannon spitting out the fires
    Of everlasting scorn into his face."

    So Drake warped out the _Golden Hynde_ anew
    Behind St. Nicholas' Island. She lay there,
    The small grey-golden centre of the world
    That raged all round her, the last hope, the star
    Of Protestant freedom, she, the outlawed ship
    Holding within her the great head and heart
    Of England's ocean power; and all the fleets
    That have enfranchised earth, in that small ship,
    Lay waiting for their doom.
                                   Past her at night
    Fisher-boats glided, wondering as they heard
    In the thick darkness the great songs they deemed
    Must oft have risen from many a lonely sea;
    For oft had Spaniards brought a rumour back
    Of that strange pirate who in royal state
    Sailed to a sound of violins, and dined
    With skilled musicians round him, turning all
    Battle and storm and death into a song.


SONG

    The same Sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other
          Wherever we be;
    With the same hope before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Ringed round with the sea.

    No land in the ring of it
      Now, all around us
        Only the splendid
          Re-surging unknown;
    How should we sing of it,
      This that hath found us
        By the great stars attended
          At midnight, alone?

    Our highway none knoweth,
      Yet our blood hath discerned it!
        Clear, clear is our path now
          Whose foreheads are free
    Where the hurricane bloweth
      Our spirits have learned it,
        'Tis the highway of wrath, now,
          The storm's way, the sea.

    When the waters lay breathless
      Gazing at Hesper
        Guarding that glorious
          Fruitage of gold,
    Heard we the deathless
      Wonderful whisper
        We follow, victorious
          To-night, as of old.

    Ah, the broad miles of it
      White with the onset
        Of waves without number
          Warring for glee;
    Ah, the soft smiles of it
      Down to the sunset,
        Sacred for slumber
          The swan's bath, the sea!

    When the breakers charged thundering
      In thousands all round us
        With a lightning of lances
          Up-hurtled on high,
    When the stout ships were sundering
      A rapture hath crowned us
        Like the wild light that dances
          On the crests that flash by.

    _Our highway none knoweth,
      Yet our blood hath discerned it!
        Clear, clear is our path now
          Whose foreheads are free,
    Where Euroclydon bloweth
      Our spirits have learned it,
        'Tis the highway of wrath, now,
          The storm's way, the sea!_

    Who now will follow us
      Where England's flag leadeth us,
        Where gold not inveigles,
          Nor statesmen betray?
    Tho' the deep midnight swallow us
      Let her cry when she needeth us,
        We return, her sea-eagles,
          The hurricane's way.

    _For the same Sun is o'er us,
      The same Love shall find us,
        The same and none other
          Wherever we be;
    With the same hope before us,
      The same home behind us,
        England, our mother,
          Ringed round with the sea._

    So six days passed, and on the seventh returned
    The courier, with a message from the Queen
    Summoning Drake to court, bidding him bring
    Also such curious trifles of his voyage
    As might amuse her, also be of good cheer
    She bade him, and rest well content his life
    In Gloriana's hands were safe: so Drake
    Laughingly landed with his war-bronzed crew
    Amid the wide-eyed throng on Plymouth beach
    And loaded twelve big pack-horses with pearls
    Beyond all price, diamonds, crosses of gold,
    Rubies that smouldered once for Aztec kings,
    And great dead Incas' gem-encrusted crowns.
    Also, he said, we'll add a sack or twain
    Of gold doubloons, pieces of eight, moidores,
    And such-like Spanish trash, for those poor lords
    At court, lilies that toil not neither spin,
    Wherefore, methinks their purses oft grow lean
    In these harsh times. 'Twere even as well their tongues
    Wagged in our favour, now, as in our blame.

       *   *   *   *

    Six days thereafter a fearful whisper reached
    Mendoza, plenipotentiary of Spain
    In London, that the pirate Drake was now
    In secret conference with the Queen, nay more,
    That he, the Master-thief of the golden world,
    Drake, even he, that bloody buccaneer,
    Had six hours' audience with her Majesty
    Daily, nay more, walked with her in her garden
    Alone, among the fiery Autumn leaves,
    Talking of God knows what, and suddenly
    The temporizing diplomatic voice
    Of caution he was wont to expect from England
    And blandly accept as his imperial due
    Changed to a ringing key of firm resolve,
    Resistance, nay, defiance. For when he came
    Demanding audience of the Queen, behold,
    Her officers of state with mouths awry
    Informed the high ambassador of Spain,
    Despite his pomp and circumstance, the Queen
    Could not receive him, being in conference
    With some rough seaman, pirate, what you will,
    A fellow made of bronze, a buccaneer,
    Maned like a lion, bearded like a pard,
    With hammered head, clamped jaws, and great deep eyes
    That burned with fierce blue colours of the brine,
    And liked not Spain--Drake! 'Twas the very name,
    One Francis Drake! a Titan that had stood,
    Thundering commands against the thundering heavens,
    On lightning-shattered, storm-swept decks and drunk
    Great draughts of glory from the rolling sea,
    El Draque! El Draque! Nor could she promise aught
    To Spain's ambassador, nor see his face
    Again, while yet one Spanish musketeer
    Remained in Ireland.
                        Vainly the Spaniard raged
    Of restitution, recompense; for now
    Had Drake brought up the little _Golden Hynde_
    To London, and the rumor of her wealth
    Out-topped the wild reality. The crew
    Were princes as they swaggered down the streets
    In weather-beaten splendour. Out of their doors
    To wonder and stare the jostling citizens ran
    When They went by; and through the length and breadth
    Of England, now, the gathering glory of life
    Shone like the dawn. O'er hill and dale it streamed,
    Dawn, everlasting and almighty dawn,
    Making a golden pomp of every oak--
    Had not its British brethren swept the seas?--
    In each remotest hamlet, by the hearth,
    The cart, the grey church-porch, the village pump
    By meadow and mill and old manorial hall,
    By turnpike and by tavern, farm and forge,
    Men staved the crimson vintage of romance
    And held it up against the light and drank it,
    And with it drank confusion to the wrath
    That menaced England, but eternal honour,
    While blood ran in their veins, to Francis Drake.


BOOK VIII

    Meanwhile, young Bess of Sydenham, the queen
    Of Drake's deep heart, emprisoned in her home,
    Fenced by her father's angry watch and ward
    Lest he--the poor plebeian dread of Spain,
    Shaker of nations, king of the untamed seas--
    Might win some word with her, sweet Bess, the flower
    Triumphant o'er their rusty heraldries,
    Waited her lover, as in ancient tales
    The pale princess from some grey wizard's tower
    Midmost the deep sigh of enchanted woods
    Looks for the starry flash of her knight's shield;
    Or on the further side o' the magic West
    Sees pushing through the ethereal golden gloom
    Some blurred black prow, with loaded colours coarse,
    Clouded with sunsets of a mortal sea,
    And rich with earthly crimson. She, with lips
    Apart, still waits the shattering golden thrill
    When it shall grate the coasts of Fairyland.

    Only, to Bess of Sydenham, there came
    No sight or sound to break that frozen spell
    And lonely watch, no message from her love,
    Or none that reached her restless helpless hands.
    Only the general rumour of the world
    Borne to her by the gossip of her maid
    Kept the swift pictures passing through her brain
    Of how the _Golden Hynde_ was hauled ashore
    At Deptford through a sea of exultation,
    And by the Queen's command was now set up
    For an everlasting memory!
    Of how the Queen with subtle statecraft still
    Kept Spain at arm's-length, dangling, while she played
    At fast and loose with France, whose embassy,
    Arriving with the marriage-treaty, found
    (And trembled at her daring, since the wrath
    Of Spain seemed, in their eyes, to flake with foam
    The storm-beat hulk) a gorgeous banquet spread
    To greet them on that very _Golden Hynde_
    Which sacked the Spanish main, a gorgeous feast,
    The like of which old England had not seen
    Since the bluff days of boisterous king Hal,
    Great shields of brawn with mustard, roasted swans,
    Haunches of venison, roasted chines of beef,
    And chewets baked, big olive-pyes thereto,
    And sallets mixed with sugar and cinnamon,
    White wine, rose-water, and candied eringoes.
    There, on the outlawed ship, whose very name
    Rang like a blasphemy in the imperial ears
    Of Spain (its every old worm-eaten plank
    Being scored with scorn and courage that not storm
    Nor death, nor all their Inquisition racks,
    The white-hot irons and bloody branding whips
    That scarred the backs of Rome's pale galley-slaves,
    Her captured English seamen, ever could daunt),
    There with huge Empires waiting for one word,
    One breath of colour and excuse, to leap
    Like wolves at the naked throat of her small isle,
    There in the eyes of the staggered world she stood,
    Great Gloriana, while the live decks reeled
    With flash of jewels and flush of rustling silks,
    She stood with Drake, the corsair, and her people
    Surged like a sea around. There did she give
    Open defiance with her agate smile
    To Spain. "Behold this pirate, now," she cried,
    "Whose head my Lord, the Invincible, Philip of Spain
    Demands from England. Kneel down, Master Drake,
    Kneel down; for now have I this gilded sword
    Wherewith to strike it off. Nay, thou my lord
    Ambassador of France, since I be woman,
    And squeamish at the sight of blood, give thou
    The accolade." With that jest she gave the hilt
    (Thus, even in boldness, playing a crafty part,
    And dangling France before the adventurous deed)
    To Marchaumont: and in the face of Europe,
    With that huge fleet in Cadiz and the whole
    World-power of Spain crouching around her isle,
    Knighted the master-thief of the unknown world,
    Sir Francis Drake.
                         And then the rumour came
    Of vaster privateerings planned by Drake
    Against the coasts of Philip; but held in check
    And fretting at the leash, as ever the Queen
    Clung to her statecraft, while Drake's enemies
    Worked in the dark against him. Spain had set
    An emperor's ransom on his life. At home
    John Doughty, treacherous brother of that traitor
    Who met his doom by Drake's own hand, intrigued
    With Spain abroad and Spain's dark emissaries
    At home to avenge his brother. Burleigh still
    Beset Drake's path with pitfalls: treacherous greed
    For Spain's blood-money daggered all the dark
    Around him, and John Doughty without cease
    Sought to make use of all; until, by chance,
    Drake gat the proof of treasonable intrigue
    With Spain, against him, up to the deadly hilt,
    And hurled him into the Tower.
                                      Many a night
    She sat by that old casement nigh the sea
    And heard its ebb and flow. With soul erect
    And splendid now she waited, yet there came
    No message; and, she thought, he hath seen at last
    My little worth. And when her maiden sang,
    With white throat throbbing softly in the dusk
    And fingers gently straying o'er the lute,
    As was her wont at twilight, some old song
    Of high disdainful queens and lovers pale
    Pining a thousand years before their feet,
    She thought, "O, if my lover loved me yet
    My heart would break for joy to welcome him:
    Perchance his true pride will not let him come
    Since false pride barred him out"; and yet again
    She burned with shame, thinking, "to him such pride
    Were matter for a jest. Ah no, he hath seen
    My little worth." Even so, one night she sat,
    One dark rich summer night, thinking him far
    Away, wrapped in the multitudinous cares
    Of one that seemed the steersman of the State
    Now, thro' the storm of Europe; while her maid
    Sang to the lute, and soft sea-breezes brought
    Wreathed scents and sighs of secret waves and flowers
    Warm through the casement's muffling jasmine bloom.


SONG


    I

    _Nymphs and naiads, come away,
                Love lies dead!
    Cover the cast-back golden head,
    Cover the lovely limbs with may,
        And with fairest boughs of green,
    And many a rose-wreathed briar spray;
        But let no hateful yew be seen
                Where Love lies dead._


    II

    _Let not the queen that would not hear,
                (Love lies dead!)
    Or beauty that refused to save.
        Exult in one dejected tear;
    But gather the glory of the year,
    The pomp and glory of the year,
    The triumphing glory of the year,
        And softly, softly, softly shed
    Its light and fragrance round the grave
                Where Love lies dead_.
    The song ceased. Far away the great sea slept,
    And all was very still. Only hard by
    One bird-throat poured its passion through the gloom,
    And the whole night breathlessly listened.
                                              A twig
    Snapped, the song ceased, the intense dumb night was all
    One passion of expectation--as if that song
    Were prelude, and ere long the heavens and earth
    Would burst into one great triumphant psalm.
    The song ceased only as if that small bird-throat
    Availed no further. Would the next great chord
    Ring out from harps in flaming seraph hands
    Ranged through the sky? The night watched, breathless, dumb.
    Bess listened. Once again a dry twig snapped
    Beneath her casement, and a face looked up,
    Draining her face of blood, of sight, of life,
    Whispering, a voice from far beyond the stars,
    Whispering, unutterable joy, the whole
    Glory of life and death in one small word--
    _Sweetheart!_
                   The jasmine at her casement shook,
    She knew no more than he was at her side,
    His arms were round her, and his breath beat warm
    Against her cheek.

       *   *   *   *

                       Suddenly, nigh the house,
    A deep-mouthed mastiff bayed and a foot crunched
    The gravel. "Hark! they are watching for thee," she cried.
    He laughed: "There's half of Europe on the watch
    Outside for my poor head, 'Tis cosier here
    With thee; but now"--his face grew grave, he drew
    A silken ladder from his doublet--"quick,
    Before yon good gamekeeper rounds the house
    We must be down." And ere the words were out
    Bess reached the path, and Drake was at her side.
    Then into the star-stabbed shadow of the woods
    They sped, his arm around her. Suddenly
    She drew back with a cry, as four grim faces,
    With hand to forelock, glimmered in their way.
    Laughing she saw their storm-beat friendly smile
    Welcome their doughty captain in this new
    Adventure. Far away, once more they heard
    The mastiff bay; then nearer, as if his nose
    Were down upon the trail; and then a cry
    As of a hot pursuit. They reached the brook,
    Hurrying to the deep. Drake lifted Bess
    In his arms, and down the watery bed they splashed
    To baffle the clamouring hunt. Then out of the woods
    They came, on the seaward side, and Bess, with a shiver,
    Saw starlight flashing from bare cutlasses,
    As the mastiff bayed still nearer. Swiftlier now
    They passed along the bare blunt cliffs and saw
    The furrow ploughed by that strange cannon-shot
    Which saved this hour for Bess; down to the beach
    And starry foam that churned the silver gravel
    Around an old black lurching boat, a strange
    Grim Charon's wherry for two lovers' flight,
    Guarded by old Tom Moone. Drake took her hand,
    And with one arm around her waist, her breath
    Warm on his cheek for a moment, in she stepped
    Daintily o'er the gunwale, and took her seat,
    His throned princess, beside him at the helm,
    Backed by the glittering waves, his throned princess,
    With jewelled throat and glorious hair that seemed
    Flashing back scents and colours to a sea
    Which lived but to reflect her loveliness.

    Then, all together, with their brandished oars
    The seamen thrust as a heavy mounded wave
    Lifted the boat; and up the flowering breast
    Of the next they soared, then settled at the thwarts,
    And the fierce water boiled before their blades
    While with Drake's iron hand upon the helm
    They plunged and ploughed across the starlit seas
    To where a small black lugger at anchor swung,
    Dipping her rakish brow i' the liquid moon.
    Small was she, but not fangless; for Bess saw,
    With half a tremor, the dumb protective grin
    Of four grim guns above the tossing boat.

    But ere his seamen or his sweetheart knew
    What power, as of a wind, bore them along,
    Anchor was up, the sails were broken out,
    And as they scudded down the dim grey coast
    Of a new enchanted world (for now had Love
    Made all things new and strange) the skilled musicians
    Upraised, at Drake's command, a song to cheer
    Their midnight path across that faery sea.


SONG


    I

    Sweet, what is love? 'Tis not the crown of kings,
    Nay, nor the fire of white seraphic wings!
    Is it a child's heart leaping while he sings?
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    II

    Love like a child around our world doth run,
    Happy, happy, happy for all that God hath done,
    Glad of all the little leaves dancing in the sun,
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    III

    Sweet, what is love? 'Tis not the burning bliss
    Angels know in heaven! God blows the world a kiss
    Wakes on earth a wild-rose! Ah, who knows not this?
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    IV

    Love, love is kind! Can it be far away,
    Lost in a light that blinds our little day?
    Seems it a great thing? Sweetheart, answer nay;
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    V

    Sweet, what is love? The dust beneath our feet,
    Whence breaks the rose and all the flowers that greet
    April and May with lips and heart so sweet;
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    VI

    Love is the dust whence Eden grew so fair,
    Dust of the dust that set my lover there,
    Ay, and wrought the gloriole of Eve's gold hair,
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.


    VII

    Also the springing spray, the little topmost flower
    Swung by the bird that sings a little hour,
    Earth's climbing spray into the heaven's blue bower,
                      Even so say I;
                      Even so say I.

    And stranger, ever stranger, grew the night
    Around those twain, for whom the fleecy moon
    Was but a mightier Cleopatra's pearl
    Dissolving in the rich dark wine of night,
    While 'mid the tenderer talk of eyes and hands
    And whispered nothings, his great ocean realm
    Rolled round their gloomy barge, robing its hulk
    With splendours Rome and Egypt never knew.
    Old ocean was his Nile, his mighty queen
    An English maiden purer than the dawn,
    His cause the cause of Freedom, his reward
    The glory of England. Strangely simple, then,
    Simple as life and death, anguish and love,
    To Bess appeared those mighty dawning dreams,
    Whereby he shaped the pageant of the world
    To a new purpose, strangely simple all
    Those great new waking tides i' the world's great soul
    That set towards the fall of tyranny
    Behind a thunderous roar of ocean triumph
    O'er burning ships and shattered fleets, while England
    Grasped with sure hands the sceptre of the sea,
    That untamed realm of Liberty which none
    Had looked upon as aught but wilderness
    Ere this, or even dreamed of as the seat
    Of power and judgment and high sovereignty
    Whereby all nations at the last should make
    One brotherhood, and war should be no more.
    And ever, as the vision broadened out,
    The sense of some tremendous change at hand,
    The approach of vast Armadas and the dawn
    Of battle, reddening the diviner dawn
    With clouds, confused it, till once more the song
    Rang out triumphant o'er the glittering sea.


SONG


    I

    _Ye that follow the vision
      Of the world's weal afar,
    Have ye met with derision
      And the red laugh of war;
    Yet the thunder shall not hurt you,
      Nor the battle-storms dismay;
    Tho' the sun in heaven desert you,
      "Love will find out the way."_


    II

    _When the pulse of hope falters,
      When the fire flickers low
    On your faith's crumbling altars,
      And the faithless gods go;
    When the fond hope ye cherished
      Cometh, kissing, to betray;
    When the last star hath perished,
      "Love will find out the way."_


    III

    _When the last dream bereaveth you,
      And the heart turns to stone,
    When the last comrade leaveth you
      In the desert, alone;
    With the whole world before you
      Clad in battle-array,
    And the starless night o'er you,
      "Love will find out the way."_


    IV

    _Your dreamers may dream it
      The shadow of a dream,
    Your sages may deem it
      A bubble on the stream;
    Yet our kingdom draweth nigher
      With each dawn and every day,
    Through the earthquake and the fire
      "Love will find out the way."_


    V

    _Love will find it, tho' the nations
      Rise up blind, as of old,
    And the new generations
      Wage their warfares of gold;
    Tho' they trample child and mother
      As red clay into the clay,
    Where brother wars with brother,
      "Love will find out the way."_

    Dawn, ever bearing some divine increase
    Of beauty, love, and wisdom round the world,
    Dawn, like a wild-rose in the fields of heaven
    Washed grey with dew, awoke, and found the barque
    At anchor in a little land-locked bay.
    A crisp breeze blew, and all the living sea
    Beneath the flower-soft colours of the sky,
    Now like a myriad-petalled rose and now
    Innumerably scalloped into shells
    Of rosy fire, with dwindling wrinkles edged
    Fainter and fainter to the unruffled glow
    And soft white pallor of the distant deep,
    Shone with a mystic beauty for those twain
    Who watched the gathering glory; and, in an hour,
    Drake and sweet Bess, attended by a guard
    Of four swart seamen, with bare cutlasses,
    And by the faithful eyes of old Tom Moone,
    Went up the rough rock-steps and twisted street
    O' the small white sparkling seaport, tow'rds the church
    Where, hand in hand, before God's altar they,
    With steadfast eyes, did plight eternal troth,
    And so were wedded. Never a chime of bells
    Had they: but as they passed from out the porch
    Between the sleeping graves, a skylark soared
    Above the world in an ecstasy of song,
    And quivering heavenwards, lost himself in light.


BOOK IX

    Now like a white-cliffed fortress England shone
    Amid the mirk of chaos; for the huge
    Empire of Spain was but the dusky van
    Of that dread night beyond all nights and days,
    Night of the last corruption of a world
    Fast-bound in misery and iron, with chains
    Of priest and king and feudal servitude,
    Night of the fettered flesh and ravaged soul,
    Night of anarchic chaos, darkening the deep,
    Swallowing up cities, kingdoms, empires, gods,
    With vaster gloom approaching, till the sun
    Of love was blackened, the moon of faith was blood.
    All round our England, our small struggling star,
    Fortress of freedom, rock o' the world's desire,
    Bearing at last the hope of all mankind,
    The thickening darkness surged, and close at hand
    Those first fierce cloudy fringes of the storm,
    The Armada sails, gathered their might; and Spain
    Crouched close behind them with her screaming fires
    And steaming shambles, Spain, the hell-hag, crouched,
    Still grasping with red hand the cross of Christ
    By its great hilt, pointing it like a dagger,
    Spear-head of the ultimate darkness, at the throat
    Of England. Under Philip's feet at last
    Writhed all the Protestant Netherlands, dim coasts
    Right over against us, whence his panoplies
    Might suddenly whelm our isle. But all night long,
    On many a mountain, many a guardian height,
    From Beachy Head to Skiddaw, little groups
    Of seamen, torch and battle-lanthorn nigh,
    Watched by the brooding unlit beacons, piled
    Of sun-dried gorse, funereal peat, rough logs,
    Reeking with oil, 'mid sharp scents of the sea,
    Waste trampled grass and heather and close-cropped thyme,
    High o'er the thundering coast, among whose rocks
    Far, far below, the pacing coastguards gazed
    Steadfastly seaward through the loaded dusk.
    And through that deepening gloom when, as it seemed,
    All England held her breath in one grim doubt,
    Swift rumours flashed from North to South as runs
    The lightning round a silent thunder-cloud;
    And there were muttering crowds in the London streets,
    And hurrying feet in the brooding Eastern ports.
    All night, dark inns, gathering the country-side,
    Reddened with clashing auguries of war.
    All night, in the ships of Plymouth Sound, the soul
    Of Francis Drake was England, and all night
    Her singing seamen by the silver quays
    Polished their guns and waited for the dawn.

    But hour by hour that night grew deeper. Spain
    Watched, cloud by cloud, her huge Armadas grow,
    Watched, tower by tower, and zone by zone, her fleets
    Grapple the sky with a hundred hands and drag
    Whole sea-horizons into her menacing ranks,
    Joining her powers to the fierce night, while Philip
    Still strove, with many a crafty word, to lull
    The fears of Gloriana, till his plots
    Were ripe, his armaments complete; and still
    Great Gloriana took her woman's way,
    Preferring ever tortuous intrigue
    To battle, since the stakes had grown so great;
    Now, more than ever, hoping against hope
    To find some subtler means of victory;
    Yet not without swift impulses to strike,
    Swiftly recalled. Blind, yet not blind, she smiled
    On Mary of Scotland waiting for her throne,
    A throne with many a strange dark tremor thrilled
    Now as the rumoured murderous mines below
    Converged towards it, mine and countermine,
    Till the live earth was honeycombed with death.
    Still with her agate smile, still she delayed,
    Holding her pirate admiral in the leash
    Till Walsingham, nay, even the hunchback Burleigh,
    That crafty king of statesmen, seeing at last
    The inevitable thunder-crash at hand.
    Grew heart-sick with delay and ached to shatter
    The tense tremendous hush that seemed to oppress
    All hearts, compress all brows, load the broad night
    With more than mortal menace.

                                        Only once
    The night was traversed with one lightning flash,
    One rapier stroke from England, at the heart
    Of Spain, as swiftly parried, yet no less
    A fiery challenge; for Philip's hate and scorn
    Growing with his Armada's growth, he lured
    With promises of just and friendly trade
    A fleet of English corn-ships to relieve
    His famine-stricken coast. There as they lay
    Within his ports he seized them, one and all,
    To fill the Armada's maw.

                                 Whereat the Queen,
    Passive so long, summoned great Walsingham,
    And, still averse from open war, despite
    The battle-hunger burning in his eyes,
    With one strange swift sharp agate smile she hissed,
    "Unchain _El Draque_!"

                             A lightning flash indeed
    Was this; for he whose little _Golden Hynde_
    With scarce a score of seamen late had scourged
    The Spanish Main; he whose piratic neck
    Scarcely the Queen's most wily statecraft saved
    From Spain's revenge: he, privateer to the eyes
    Of Spain, but England to all English hearts,
    Gathered together, in all good jollity,
    All help and furtherance himself could wish,
    Before that moon was out, a pirate fleet
    Whereof the like old ocean had not seen--
    Eighteen swift cruisers, two great battleships,
    With pinnaces and store-ships and a force
    Of nigh three thousand men, wherewith to singe
    The beard o' the King of Spain.
                                     By night they gathered
    In marvellous wind-whipt inns nigh Plymouth Sound,
    Not secretly as, ere the _Golden Hynde_
    Burst thro' the West, that small adventurous crew
    Gathered beside the Thames, tossing the phrase
    "Pieces of eight" from mouth to mouth, and singing
    Great songs of the rich Indies, and those tall
    Enchanted galleons, red with blood and gold,
    Superb with rubies, glorious as clouds,
    Clouds in the sun, with mighty press of sail
    Dragging the sunset out of the unknown world,
    And staining all the grey old seas of Time
    With rich romance; but these, though privateers,
    Or secret knights on Gloriana's quest,
    Recked not if round the glowing magic door
    Of every inn the townsfolk grouped to hear
    The storm-scarred seamen toasting Francis Drake,
    Nor heeded what blithe urchin faces pressed
    On each red-curtained magic casement, bright
    With wild reflection of the fires within,
    The fires, the glasses, and the singing lips
    Lifting defiance to the powers of Spain.


SONG

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower of flowers most glorious!
    Never a storm that blows
      Across our English sea,
    But its heart breaks out wi' the Rose
      On England's flag victorious,
    The triumphing flag that flows
      Thro' the heavens of Liberty.

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower of flowers most beautiful!
    Until the world shall end
      She blossometh year by year,
    Red with the blood that flows
      For England's sake, most dutiful,
    Wherefore now we bend
      Our hearts and knees to her.

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower, the flower of war it is,
    Where deep i' the midnight gloom
      Its waves are the waves of the sea,
    And the glare of battle grows,
      And red over hulk and spar it is,
    Till the grim black broadsides bloom
      With our Rose of Victory.

    Sing we the Rose,
      The flower, the flower of love it is,
    Which lovers aye shall sing
      And nightingales proclaim;
    For O, the heaven that glows,
      That glows and burns above it is
    Freedom's perpetual Spring,
      Our England's faithful fame.

    Sing we the Rose,
      That Eastward still shall spread for us
    Upon the dawn's bright breast,
      Red leaves wi' the foam impearled;
    And onward ever flows
      Till eventide make red for us
    A Rose that sinks i' the West
      And surges round the world;
    Sing we the Rose!

    One night as, with his great vice-admiral,
    Frobisher, his rear-admiral, Francis Knollys,
    And Thomas Fenner, his flag-captain, Drake
    Took counsel at his tavern, there came a knock,
    The door opened, and cold as from the sea
    The gloom rushed in, and there against the night,
    Clad as it seemed with wind and cloud and rain,
    Glittered a courtier whom by face and form
    All knew for the age's brilliant paladin,
    Sidney, the king of courtesy, a star
    Of chivalry. The seamen stared at him,
    Each with a hand upon the red-lined chart
    Outspread before them. Then all stared at Drake,
    Who crouched like a great bloodhound o'er the table,
    And rose with a strange light burning in his eyes;
    For he remembered how, three years agone,
    That other courtier came, with words and smiles
    Copied from Sidney's self; and in his ears
    Rang once again the sound of the two-edged sword
    Upon the desolate Patagonian shore
    Beneath Magellan's gallows. With a voice
    So harsh himself scarce knew it, he desired
    This fair new courtier's errand. With grim eyes
    He scanned the silken knight from head to foot,
    While Sidney, smiling graciously, besought
    Some place in their adventure. Drake's clenched fist
    Crashed down on the old oak table like a rock,
    Splintering the wood and dashing his rough wrist
    With blood, as he thundered, "By the living God,
    No! We've no room for courtiers, now! We leave
    All that to Spain."
                          Whereat, seeing Sidney stood
    Amazed, Drake, drawing nearer, said, "You ask
    More than you dream: I know you for a knight
    Most perfect and most gentle, yea, a man
    Ready to die on any battle-field
    To save a wounded friend" (even so said Drake,
    Not knowing how indeed this knight would die),
    Then fiercely he outstretched his bleeding hand
    And pointed through the door to where the gloom
    Glimmered with bursting spray, and the thick night
    Was all one wandering thunder of hidden seas
    Rolling out of Eternity: "You'll find
    No purple fields of Arcady out there,
    No shepherds piping in those boisterous valleys,
    No sheep among those roaring mountain-tops,
    No lists of feudal chivalry. I've heard
    That voice cry death to courtiers. 'Tis God's voice.
    Take you the word of one who has occupied
    His business in great waters. There's no room,
    Meaning, or reason, office, or place, or name
    For courtiers on the sea. Does the sea flatter?
    You cannot bribe it, torture it, or tame it!
    Its laws are those of the Juggernaut universe,
    Remorseless--listen to that!"--a mighty wave
    Broke thundering down the coast; "your hands are white,
    Your rapier jewelled, can you grapple that?
    What part have you in all its flaming ways?
    What share in its fierce gloom? Has your heart broken
    As those waves break out there? Can you lie down
    And sleep, as a lion-cub by the old lion,
    When it shakes its mane out over you to hide you,
    And leap out with the dawn as I have done?
    These are big words; but, see, my hand is red:
    You cannot torture me, I have borne all that;
    And so I have some kinship with the sea,
    Some sort of wild alliance with its storms,
    Its exultations, ay, and its great wrath
    At last, and power upon them. 'Tis the worse
    For Spain, Be counselled well: come not between
    My sea and its rich vengeance."
                                     Silently,
    Bowing his head, Sidney withdrew. But Drake,
    So fiercely the old grief rankled in his heart,
    Summoned his swiftest horseman, bidding him ride,
    Ride like the wind through the night, straight to the Queen,
    Praying she would most instantly recall
    Her truant courtier. Nay, to make all sure,
    Drake sent a gang of seamen out to crouch
    Ambushed in woody hollows nigh the road,
    Under the sailing moon, there to waylay
    The Queen's reply, that she might never know
    It reached him, if it proved against his will.

    And swiftly came that truant's stern recall;
    But Drake, in hourly dread of some new change
    In Gloriana's mood, slept not by night
    Or day, till out of roaring Plymouth Sound
    The pirate fleet swept to the wind-swept main,
    And took the wind and shook out all its sails.
    Then with the unfettered sea he mixed his soul
    In great rejoicing union, while the ships
    Crashing and soaring o'er the heart-free waves
    Drave ever straight for Spain.
                                    Water and food
    They lacked; but the fierce fever of his mind
    To sail from Plymouth ere the Queen's will changed
    Had left no time for these. Right on he drave,
    Determining, though the Queen's old officers
    Beneath him stood appalled, to take in stores
    Of all he needed, water, powder, food,
    By plunder of Spain herself. In Vigo bay,
    Close to Bayona town, under the cliffs
    Of Spain's world-wide and thunder-fraught prestige
    He anchored, with the old sea-touch that wakes
    Our England still. There, in the tingling ears
    Of the world he cried, _En garde_! to the King of Spain.
    There, ordering out his pinnaces in force,
    While a great storm, as if he held indeed
    Heaven's batteries in reserve, growled o'er the sea,
    He landed. Ere one cumbrous limb of all
    The monstrous armaments of Spain could move
    His ships were stored; and ere the sword of Spain
    Stirred in its crusted sheath, Bayona town
    Beheld an empty sea; for like a dream
    The pirate fleet had vanished, none knew whither.
    But, in its visible stead, invisible fear
    Filled the vast rondure of the sea and sky
    As with the omnipresent soul of Drake.
    For when Spain saw the small black anchored fleet
    Ride in her bays, the sight set bounds to fear.
    She knew at least the ships were oak, the guns
    Of common range: nor did she dream e'en Drake
    Could sail two seas at once. Now all her coasts
    Heard him all night in every bursting wave,
    His topsails gleamed in every moonlit cloud;
    His battle-lanthorn glittered in the stars
    That hung the low horizon. He became
    A universal menace; yet there followed
    No sight or sound of him, unless the sea
    Were that grim soul incarnate. Did it not roar
    His great commands? The very spray that lashed
    The cheeks of Spanish seamen lashed their hearts
    To helpless hatred of him. The wind sang
    _El Draque_ across the rattling blocks and sheets
    When storms perplexed them; and when ships went down,
    As under the fury of his onsetting battle,
    The drowning sailors cursed him while they sank.

    Suddenly a rumour shook the Spanish Court,
    He has gone once more to the Indies. Santa Cruz,
    High Admiral of Spain, the most renowned
    Captain in Europe, clamoured for a fleet
    Of forty sail instantly to pursue.
    For unto him whose little _Golden Hynde_
    Was weapon enough, now leading such a squadron,
    The West Indies, the whole Pacific coast,
    And the whole Spanish Main, lay at his mercy.

    And onward over the great grey gleaming sea
    Swept like a thunder-cloud the pirate fleet
    With vengeance in its heart. Five years agone,
    Young Hawkins, in the Cape Verde Islands, met--
    At Santiago--with such treachery
    As Drake burned to requite, and from that hour
    Was Santiago doomed. His chance had come;
    Drake swooped upon it, plundered it, and was gone,
    Leaving the treacherous isle a desolate heap
    Of smoking ashes in the leaden sea,
    While onward all those pirate bowsprits plunged
    Into the golden West, across the broad
    Atlantic once again; "For I will show,"
    Said Drake, "that Englishmen henceforth will sail
    Old ocean where they will." Onward they surged,
    And the great glittering crested majestic waves
    Jubilantly rushed up to meet the keels,
    And there was nought around them but the grey
    Ruin and roar of the huge Atlantic seas,
    Grey mounded seas, pursuing and pursued,
    That fly, hounded and hounding on for ever,
    From empty marge to marge of the grey sky.
    Over the wandering wilderness of foam,
    Onward, through storm and death, Drake swept; for now
    Once more a fell plague gripped the tossing ships,
    And not by twos and threes as heretofore
    His crews were minished; but in three black days
    Three hundred seamen in their shotted shrouds
    Were cast into the deep. Onward he swept,
    Implacably, having in mind to strike
    Spain in the throat at St. Domingo, port
    Of Hispaniola, a city of far renown,
    A jewel on the shores of old romance,
    Palm-shadowed, gated with immortal gold,
    Queen city of Spain's dominions over sea,
    And guarded by great guns. Out of the dawn
    The pirate ships came leaping, grim and black,
    And ere the Spaniards were awake, the flag
    Of England floated from their topmost tower.
    But since he had not troops enough to hold
    So great a city, Drake entrenched his men
    Within the Plaza and held the batteries.
    Thence he demanded ransom, and sent out
    A boy with flag of truce. The boy's return
    Drake waited long. Under a sheltering palm
    He stood, watching the enemies' camp, and lo,
    Along the hot white purple-shadowed road
    Tow'rds him, a crawling shape writhed through the dust
    Up to his feet, a shape besmeared with blood,
    A shape that held the stumps up of its wrists
    And moaned, an eyeless thing, a naked rag
    Of flesh obscenely mangled, a small face
    Hideously puckered, shrivelled like a monkey's
    With lips drawn backward from its teeth.
                                             "Speak, speak,
    In God's name, speak, what art thou?" whispered Drake,
    And a sharp cry came, answering his dread,
    A cry as of a sea-bird in the wind
    Desolately astray from all earth's shores,
    "Captain, I am thy boy, only thy boy!
    See, see, my captain, see what they have done!
    Captain, I only bore the flag; I only----"

    "O, lad, lad, lad," moaned Drake, and, stooping, strove
    To pillow the mangled head upon his arm.
    "What have they done to thee, what have they done?"
    And at the touch the boy screamed, once, and died.

    Then like a savage sea with arms uplift
    To heaven the wrath of Drake blazed thundering,
    "Eternal God, be this the doom of Spain!
    Henceforward have no pity. Send the strength
    Of Thy great seas into my soul that I
    May devastate this empire, this red hell
    They make of Thy good earth."
                                       His men drew round,
    Staring in horror at the silent shape
    That daubed his feet. Like a cold wind
    His words went through their flesh:
                                          "This is the lad
    That bore our flag of truce. This hath Spain done.
    Look well upon it, draw the smoke of the blood
    Up into your nostrils, my companions,
    And down into your souls. This makes an end
    For Spain! Bring forth the Spanish prisoners
    And let me look on them."

                                 Forth they were brought,
    A swarthy gorgeous band of soldiers, priests,
    And sailors, hedged between two sturdy files
    Of British tars with naked cutlasses.
    Close up to Drake they halted, under the palm,
    Gay smiling prisoners, for they thought their friends
    Had ransomed them. Then they looked up and met
    A glance that swept athwart them like a sword,
    Making the blood strain back from their blanched faces
    Into their quivering hearts, with unknown dread,
    As that accuser pointed to the shape
    Before his feet.
                    "Dogs, will ye lap his blood
    Before ye die? Make haste; for it grows cold!
    Ye will not, will not even dabble your hands
    In that red puddle of flesh, what? Are ye Spaniards?
    Come, come, I'll look at you, perchance there's one
    That's but a demi-devil and holds you back."
    And with the word Drake stepped among their ranks
    And read each face among the swarthy crew--
    The gorgeous soldiers, ringleted sailors, priests
    With rosary and cross, a slender page
    In scarlet with a cloud of golden hair,
    And two rope-girdled friars.
                                 The slim page
    Drake drew before the throng. "You are young," he said,
    "Go; take this message to the camp of Spain:
    Tell them I have a hunger in my soul
    To look upon the murderers of this boy,
    To see what eyes they have, what manner of mouths,
    To touch them and to take their hands in mine,
    And draw them close to me and smile upon them
    Until they know my soul as I know theirs,
    And they grovel in the dust and grope for mercy.
    Say that, until I get them, every day
    I'll hang two Spaniards though I dispeople
    The Spanish Main. Tell them that, every day,
    I'll burn a portion of their city down,
    Then find another city and burn that,
    And then burn others till I burn away
    Their empire from the world, ay, till I reach
    The Imperial throne of Philip with my fires,
    And send it shrieking down to burn in hell
    For ever. Go!"
                       Then Drake turned once again,
    To face the Spanish prisoners. With a voice
    Cold as the passionless utterance of Fate
    His grim command went forth. "Now, provost-marshal,
    Begin with yon two friars, in whose faces
    Chined like singed swine, and eyed with the spent coals
    Of filthy living, sweats the glory of Spain.
    Strip off their leprous rags
    And twist their ropes around their throats and hang them
    High over the Spanish camp for all to see.
    At dawn I'll choose two more."


BOOK X

                                        Across the Atlantic
    Great rumours rushed as of a mighty wind,
    The wind of the spirit of Drake. But who shall tell
    In this cold age the power that he became
    Who drew the universe within his soul
    And moved with cosmic forces? Though the deep
    Divided it from Drake, the gorgeous court
    Of Philip shuddered away from the streaming coasts
    As a wind-cuffed field of golden wheat. The King,
    Bidding his guests to a feast in his own ship
    On that wind-darkened sea, was made a mock,
    As one by one his ladies proffered excuse
    For fear of That beyond. Round Europe now
    Ballad and story told how in the cabin
    Of Francis Drake there hung a magic glass
    Wherein he saw the fleets of every foe
    And all that passed aboard them. Rome herself,
    Perplexed that this proud heretic should prevail,
    Fostered a darker dream, that Drake had bought,
    Like old Norse wizards, power to loose or bind
    The winds at will.

                         And now a wilder tale
    Flashed o'er the deep--of a distant blood-red dawn
    O'er San Domingo, where the embattled troops
    Of Spain and Drake were met--but not in war--
    Met in the dawn, by his compelling will,
    To offer up a sacrifice. Yea, there
    Between the hosts, the hands of Spain herself
    Slaughtered the Spanish murderers of the boy
    Who had borne Drake's flag of truce; offered them up
    As a blood-offering and an expiation
    Lest Drake, with that dread alchemy of his soul,
    Should e'en transmute the dust beneath their feet
    To one same substance with the place of pain
    And whelm them suddenly in the eternal fires.
    Rumour on rumour rushed across the sea,
    Large mockeries, and one most bitter of all,
    Wormwood to Philip, of how Drake had stood
    I' the governor's house at San Domingo, and seen
    A mighty scutcheon of the King of Spain
    Whereon was painted the terrestrial globe,
    And on the globe a mighty steed in act
    To spring into the heavens, and from its mouth
    Streaming like smoke a scroll, and on the scroll
    Three words of flame and fury--_Non sufficit
    Orbis_--of how Drake and his seamen stood
    Gazing upon it, and could not forbear
    From summoning the Spaniards to expound
    Its meaning, whereupon a hurricane roar
    Of mirth burst from those bearded British lips,
    And that immortal laughter shook the world.

    So, while the imperial warrior eyes of Spain
    Watched, every hour, her vast Armada grow
    Readier to launch and shatter with one stroke
    Our island's frail defence, fear gripped her still,
    For there came sounds across the heaving sea
    Of secret springs unsealed, forces unchained,
    A mustering of deep elemental powers,
    A sound as of the burgeoning of boughs
    In universal April and dead hearts
    Uprising from their tombs; a mighty cry
    Of resurrection, surging through the souls
    Of all mankind. For now the last wild tale
    Swept like another dawn across the deep;
    And, in that dawn, men saw the slaves of Spain,
    The mutilated negroes of the mines,
    With gaunt backs wealed and branded, scarred and seared
    By whip and iron, in Spain's brute lust for gold,
    Saw them, at Drake's great liberating word,
    Burst from their chains, erect, uplifting hands
    Of rapture to the glad new light that then,
    Then first, began to struggle thro' the clouds
    And crown all manhood with a sacred crown
    August--a light which, though from age to age
    Clouds may obscure it, grows and still shall grow,
    Until that Kingdom come, that grand Communion,
    That Commonweal, that Empire, which still draws
    Nigher with every hour, that Federation,
    That turning of the wasteful strength of war
    To accomplish large and fruitful tasks of peace,
    That gathering up of one another's loads
    Whereby the weak are strengthened and the strong
    Made stronger in the increasing good of all.
    Then, suddenly, it seemed, as he had gone,
    A ship came stealing into Plymouth Sound
    And Drake was home again, but not to rest;
    For scarce had he cast anchor ere the road
    To London rang beneath the flying hoofs
    That bore his brief despatch to Burleigh, saying--
    "We have missed the Plate Fleet by but twelve hours' sail,
    The reason being best known to God. No less
    We have given a cooling to the King of Spain.
    There is a great gap opened which, methinks,
    Is little to his liking. We have sacked
    The towns of his chief Indies, burnt their ships,
    Captured great store of gold and precious stones,
    Three hundred pieces of artillery,
    The more part brass. Our loss is heavy indeed,
    Under the hand of God, eight hundred men,
    Three parts of them by sickness. Captain Moone,
    My trusty old companion, he that struck
    The first blow in the South Seas at a Spaniard,
    Died of a grievous wound at Cartagena.
    My fleet and I are ready to strike again
    At once, where'er the Queen and England please.
    I pray for her commands, and those with speed,
    That I may strike again." Outside the scroll
    These words were writ once more--"My Queen's commands
    I much desire, your servant, Francis Drake."

    This terse despatch the hunchback Burleigh read
    Thrice over, with the broad cliff of his brow
    Bending among his books. Thrice he assayed
    To steel himself with caution as of old;
    And thrice, as a glorious lightning running along
    And flashing between those simple words, he saw
    The great new power that lay at England's hand,
    An ocean-sovereignty, a power unknown
    Before, but dawning now; a power that swept
    All earth's old plots and counterplots away
    Like straws; the germ of an unmeasured force
    New-born, that laid the source of Spanish might
    At England's mercy! Could that force but grow
    Ere Spain should nip it, ere the mighty host
    That waited in the Netherlands even now,
    That host of thirty thousand men encamped
    Round Antwerp, under Parma, should embark
    Convoyed by that Invincible Armada
    To leap at England's throat! Thrice he assayed
    To think of England's helplessness, her ships
    Little and few. Thrice he assayed to quench
    With caution the high furnace of his soul
    Which Drake had kindled. As he read the last
    Rough simple plea, _I wait my Queen's commands_,
    His deep eyes flashed with glorious tears.
                                              He leapt
    To his feet and cried aloud, "Before my God,
    I am proud, I am very proud for England's sake!
    This Drake is a terrible man to the King of Spain."

    And still, still, Gloriana, brooding darkly
    On Mary of Scotland's doom, who now at last
    Was plucked from out her bosom like a snake
    Hissing of war with France, a queenly snake,
    A Lilith in whose lovely gleaming folds
    And sexual bonds the judgment of mankind
    Writhes even yet half-strangled, meting out
    Wild execrations on the maiden Queen
    Who quenched those jewelled eyes and mixt with dust
    That white and crimson, who with cold sharp steel
    In substance and in spirit, severed the neck
    And straightened out those glittering supple coils
    For ever; though for evermore will men
    Lie subject to the unforgotten gleam
    Of diamond eyes and cruel crimson mouth,
    And curse the sword-bright intellect that struck
    Like lightning far through Europe and the world
    For England, when amid the embattled fury
    Of world-wide empires, England stood alone.
    Still she held back from war, still disavowed
    The deeds of Drake to Spain; and yet once more
    Philip, resolved at last never to swerve
    By one digressive stroke, one ell or inch
    From his own patient, sure, laborious path,
    Accepted her suave plea, and with all speed
    Pressed on his huge emprise until it seemed
    His coasts groaned with grim bulks of cannonry,
    Thick loaded hulks of thunder and towers of doom;
    And, all round Antwerp, Parma still prepared
    To hurl such armies o'er the rolling sea
    As in all history hardly the earth herself
    Felt shake with terror her own green hills and plains.
    _I wait my Queen's commands!_ Despite the plea
    Urged every hour upon her with the fire
    That burned for action in the soul of Drake,
    Still she delayed, till on one darkling eve
    She gave him audience in that glimmering room
    Where first he saw her. Strangely sounded there
    The seaman's rough strong passion as he poured
    His heart before her, pleading--"Every hour
    Is one more victory lost," and only heard
    The bitter answer--"Nay, but every hour
    Is a breath snatched from the unconquerable
    Doom, that awaits us if we are forced to war.
    Yea, and who knows?--though Spain may forge a sword,
    Its point is not inevitably bared
    Against the breast of England!" As she spake,
    The winds without clamoured with clash of bells,
    There was a gleam of torches and a roar--
    _Mary, the traitress of the North, is dead,
    God save the Queen!_
                         Her head bent down: she wept.
    "Pity me, friend, though I be queen, O yet
    My heart is woman, and I am sore pressed
    On every side,--Scotland and France and Spain
    Beset me, and I know not where to turn."
    Even as she spake, there came a hurried step
    Into that dim rich chamber. Walsingham
    Stood there, before her, without ceremony
    Thrusting a letter forth: "At last," he cried,
    "Your Majesty may read the full intent
    Of priestly Spain. Here, plainly written out
    Upon this paper, worth your kingdom's crown,
    This letter, stolen by a trusty spy,
    Out of the inmost chamber of the Pope
    Sixtus himself, here is your murder planned:
    Blame not your Ministers who with such haste
    Plucked out this viper, Mary, from your breast!
    Read here--how, with his thirty thousand men,
    The pick of Europe, Parma joins the Scots,
    While Ireland, grasped in their Armada's clutch,
    And the Isle of Wight, against our west and south
    Become their base."
                        "Rome, Rome, and Rome again,
    And always Rome," she muttered; "even here
    In England hath she thousands yet. She hath struck
    Her curse out with pontific finger at me,
    Cursed me down and away to the bottomless pit.
    Her shadow like the shadow of clouds or sails,
    The shadow of that huge event at hand,
    Darkens the seas already, and the wind
    Is on my cheek that shakes my kingdom down.
    She hath thousands here in England, born and bred
    Englishmen. They will stand by Rome!"

                                           "'Fore God,"
    Cried Walsingham, "my Queen, you do them wrong!
    There is another Rome--not this of Spain
    Which lurks to pluck the world back into darkness
    And stab it there for gold. There is a City
    Whose eyes are tow'rd the morning; on whose heights
    Blazes the Cross of Christ above the world;
    A Rome that shall wage warfare yet for God
    In the dark days to come, a Rome whose thought
    Shall march with our humanity and be proud
    To cast old creeds like seed into the ground,
    Watch the strange shoots and foster the new flower
    Of faiths we know not yet. Is this a dream?
    I speak as one by knighthood bound to speak;
    For even this day--and my heart burns with it--
    I heard the Catholic gentlemen of England
    Speaking in grave assembly. At one breath
    Of peril to our island, why, their swords
    Leapt from their scabbards, and their cry went up
    To split the heavens--_God save our English Queen!_"
    Even as he spake there passed the rushing gleam
    Of torches once again, and as they stood
    Silently listening, all the winds ran wild
    With clamouring bells, and a great cry went up--
    _God save Elizabeth, our English Queen!_

    "I'll vouch for some two hundred Catholic throats
    Among that thousand," whispered Walsingham
    Eagerly, with his eyes on the Queen's face.
    Then, seeing it brighten, fervently he cried,
    Pressing the swift advantage home, "O, Madam,
    The heart of England now is all on fire!
    We are one people, as we have not been
    In all our history, all prepared to die
    Around your throne. Madam, you are beloved
    As never yet was English king or queen!"
    She looked at him, the tears in her keen eyes
    Glittered--"And I am very proud," she said,
    "But if our enemies command the world,
    And we have one small island and no more...."
    She ceased; and Drake, in a strange voice, hoarse and low,
    Trembling with passion deeper than all speech,
    Cried out--"No more than the great ocean-sea
    Which makes the enemies' coast our frontier now;
    No more than that great Empire of the deep
    Which rolls from Pole to Pole, washing the world
    With thunder, that great Empire whose command
    This day is yours to take. Hear me, my Queen,
    This is a dream, a new dream, but a true;
    For mightier days are dawning on the world
    Than heart of man hath known. If England hold
    The sea, she holds the hundred thousand gates
    That open to futurity. She holds
    The highway of all ages. Argosies
    Of unknown glory set their sails this day
    For England out of ports beyond the stars.
    Ay, on the sacred seas we ne'er shall know
    They hoist their sails this day by peaceful quays,
    Great gleaming wharves in the perfect City of God,
    If she but claim her heritage."
                                    He ceased;
    And the deep dream of that new realm the sea,
    Through all the soul of Gloriana surged,
    A moment, then with splendid eyes that filled
    With fire of sunsets far away, she cried
    (Faith making her a child, yet queenlier still)
    "Yea, claim it thou for me!"
                                 A moment there
    Trembling she stood. Then, once again, there passed
    A rush of torches through the gloom without,
    And a great cry "_God save Elizabeth,
    God save our English Queen!_"
                                      "Yea go, then, go,"
    She said, "God speed you now, Sir Francis Drake,
    Not as a privateer, but with full powers,
    My Admiral-at-the-Seas!"
                                Without a word
    Drake bent above her hand and, ere she knew it,
    His eyes from the dark doorway flashed farewell
    And he was gone. But ere he leapt to saddle
    Walsingham stood at his stirrup, muttering "Ride,
    Ride now like hell to Plymouth; for the Queen
    Is hard beset, and ere ye are out at sea
    Her mood will change. The friends of Spain will move
    Earth and the heavens for your recall. They'll tempt her
    With their false baits of peace, though I shall stand
    Here at your back through thick and thin; farewell!"
    Fire flashed beneath the hoofs and Drake was gone.

    Scarce had he vanished in the night than doubt
    Once more assailed the Queen. The death of Mary
    Had brought e'en France against her. Walsingham,
    And Burleigh himself, prime mover of that death,
    Being held in much disfavour for it, stood
    As helpless. Long ere Drake or human power,
    They thought, could put to sea, a courier sped
    To Plymouth bidding Drake forbear to strike
    At Spain, but keep to the high seas, and lo,
    The roadstead glittered empty. Drake was gone!

    Gone! Though the friends of Spain had poured their gold
    To thin his ranks, and every hour his crews
    Deserted, he had laughed--"Let Spain buy scum!
    Next to an honest seaman I love best
    An honest landsman. What more goodly task
    Than teaching brave men seamanship?" He had filled
    His ships with soldiers! Out in the teeth of the gale
    That raged against him he had driven. In vain,
    Amid the boisterous laughter of the quays,
    A pinnace dashed in hot pursuit and met
    A roaring breaker and came hurtling back
    With oars and spars all trailing in the foam,
    A tangled mass of wreckage and despair.
    Sky swept to stormy sky: no sail could live
    In that great yeast of waves; but Drake was gone!

    Then, once again, across the rolling sea
    Great rumours rushed of how he had sacked the port
    Of Cadiz and had swept along the coast
    To Lisbon, where the whole Armada lay.
    Had snapped up prizes under its very nose,
    And taunted Santa Cruz, High Admiral
    Of Spain, striving to draw him out for fight,
    And offering, if his course should lie that way,
    To convoy him to Britain, taunted him
    So bitterly that for once, in the world's eyes,
    A jest had power to kill; for Santa Cruz
    Died with the spleen of it, since he could not move
    Before the appointed season. Then there came
    Flying back home, the Queen's old Admiral
    Borough, deserting Drake and all aghast
    At Drake's temerity: "For," he said, "this man,
    Thrust o'er my head, against all precedent,
    Bade me follow him into harbour mouths
    A-flame with cannon like the jaws of death,
    Whereat I much demurred; and straightway Drake
    Clapped me in irons, me--an officer
    And Admiral of the Queen; and, though my voice
    Was all against it, plunged into the pit
    Without me, left me with some word that burns
    And rankles in me still, making me fear
    The man was mad, some word of lonely seas,
    A desert island and a mutineer
    And dead Magellan's gallows. Sirs, my life
    Was hardly safe with him. Why, he resolved
    To storm the Castle of St. Vincent, sirs,
    A castle on a cliff, grinning with guns,
    Well known impregnable! The Spaniards fear
    Drake; but to see him land below it and bid
    Surrender, sirs, the strongest fort of Spain
    Without a blow, they laughed! And straightway he,
    With all the fury of Satan, turned that cliff
    To hell itself. He sent down to the ships
    For faggots, broken oars, beams, bowsprits, masts,
    And piled them up against the outer gates,
    Higher and higher, and fired them. There he stood
    Amid the smoke and flame and cannon-shot,
    This Admiral, like a common seamen, black
    With soot, besmeared with blood, his naked arms
    Full of great faggots, labouring like a giant
    And roaring like Apollyon. Sirs, he is mad!
    But did he take it, say you? Yea, he took it,
    The mightiest stronghold on the coast of Spain,
    Took it and tumbled all its big brass guns
    Clattering over the cliffs into the sea.
    But, sirs, ye need not raise a cheer so loud
    It is not warfare. 'Twas a madman's trick,
    A devil's!"
                 Then the rumour of a storm
    That scattered the fleet of Drake to the four winds
    Disturbed the heart of England, as his ships
    Came straggling into harbour, one by one,
    Saying they could not find him. Then, at last,
    When the storm burst in its earth-shaking might
    Along our coasts, one night of rolling gloom
    His cannon woke old Plymouth. In he came
    Across the thunder and lightning of the sea
    With his grim ship of war and, close behind,
    A shadow like a mountain or a cloud
    Torn from the heaven-high panoplies of Spain,
    A captured galleon loomed, and round her prow
    A blazoned scroll, whence (as she neared the quays
    Which many a lanthorn swung from brawny fist
    Yellowed) the sudden crimson of her name
    _San Filippe_ flashed o'er the white sea of faces,
    And a rending shout went skyward that outroared
    The blanching breakers--"'Tis the heart of Spain!
    The great _San Filippe_!" Overhead she towered,
    The mightiest ship afloat; and in her hold
    The riches of a continent, a prize
    Greater than earth had ever known; for there
    Not only ruby and pearl like ocean-beaches
    Heaped on some wizard coast in that dim hull
    Blazed to the lanthorn-light; not only gold
    Gleamed, though of gold a million would not buy
    Her store; but in her cabin lay the charts
    And secrets of the wild unwhispered wealth
    Of India, secrets that splashed London wharves
    With coloured dreams and made her misty streets
    Flame like an Eastern City when the sun
    Shatters itself on jewelled domes and spills
    Its crimson wreckage thro' the silvery palms.
    And of those dreams the far East India quest
    Began: the first foundation-stone was laid
    Of our great Indian Empire, and a star
    Began to tremble on the brows of England
    That time can never darken.
                                  But now the seas
    Darkened indeed with menace; now at last
    The cold wind of the black approaching wings
    Of Azrael crept across the deep: the storm
    Throbbed with their thunderous pulse, and ere that moon
    Waned, a swift gunboat foamed into the Sound
    With word that all the Invincible Armada
    Was hoisting sail for England.
                                     Even now,
    Elizabeth, torn a thousand ways, withheld
    The word for which Drake pleaded as for life,
    That he might meet them ere they left their coasts,
    Meet them or ever they reached the Channel, meet them
    Now, or--"Too late! Too late!" At last his voice
    Beat down e'en those that blindly dinned her ears
    With chatter of meeting Spain on British soil;
    And swiftly she commanded (seeing once more
    The light that burned amid the approaching gloom
    In Drake's deep eyes) Lord Howard of Effingham,
    High Admiral of England, straight to join him
    At Plymouth Sound. "How many ships are wanted?"
    She asked him, thinking "we are few, indeed!"
    "Give me but sixteen merchantmen," he said,
    "And but four battleships, by the mercy of God,
    I'll answer for the Armada!" Out to sea
    They swept, in the teeth of a gale; but vainly Drake
    Strove to impart the thought wherewith his mind
    Travailed--to win command of the ocean-sea
    By bursting on the fleets of Spain at once
    Even as they left their ports, not as of old
    To hover in a vain dream of defence
    Round fifty threatened points of British coast,
    But Howard, clinging to his old-world order,
    Flung out his ships in a loose, long, straggling line
    Across the Channel, waiting, wary, alert,
    But powerless thus as a string of scattered sea-gulls
    Beating against the storm. Then, flying to meet them,
    A merchantman brought terror down the wind,
    With news that she had seen that monstrous host
    Stretching from sky to sky, great hulks of doom,
    Dragging death's midnight with them o'er the sea
    Tow'rds England. Up to Howard's flag-ship Drake
    In his immortal battle-ship--_Revenge_,
    Rushed thro' the foam, and thro' the swirling seas
    His pinnace dashed alongside. On to the decks
    O' the tossing flag-ship, like a very Viking
    Shaking the surf and rainbows of the spray
    From sun-smit lion-like mane and beard he stood
    Before Lord Howard in the escutcheoned poop
    And poured his heart out like the rending sea
    In passionate wave on wave:
                                  "If yonder fleet
    Once reach the Channel, hardly the mercy of God
    Saves England! I would pray with my last breath,
    Let us beat up to windward of them now,
    And handle them before they reach the Channel."
    "Nay; but we cannot bare the coast," cried Howard,
    "Nor have we stores of powder or food enough!"
    "My lord," said Drake, with his great arm outstretched,
    "There is food enough in yonder enemy's ships,
    And powder enough and cannon-shot enough!
    We must re-victual there. Look! look!" he cried,
    And pointed to the heavens. As for a soul
    That by sheer force of will compels the world
    To work his bidding, so it seemed the wind
    That blew against them slowly veered. The sails
    Quivered, the skies revolved. A northerly breeze
    Awoke and now, behind the British ships,
    Blew steadily tow'rds the unseen host of Spain.
    "It is the breath of God," cried Drake; "they lie
    Wind-bound, and we may work our will with them.
    Signal the word, Lord Howard, and drive down!"
    And as a man convinced by heaven itself
    Lord Howard ordered, straightway, the whole fleet
    To advance.
                  And now, indeed, as Drake foresaw,
    The Armada lay, beyond the dim horizon,
    Wind-bound and helpless in Corunna bay,
    At England's mercy, could her fleet but draw
    Nigh enough, with its fire-ships and great guns
    To windward. Nearer, nearer, league by league
    The ships of England came: till Ushant lay
    Some seventy leagues behind. Then, yet once more
    The wind veered, straight against them. To remain
    Beating against it idly was to starve:
    And, as a man whose power upon the world
    Fails for one moment of exhausted will,
    Drake, gathering up his forces as he went
    For one more supreme effort, turned his ship
    Tow'rds Plymouth, and retreated with the rest.

    There, while the ships refitted with all haste
    And axe and hammer rang, one golden eve
    Just as the setting sun began to fringe
    The clouds with crimson, and the creaming waves
    Were one wild riot of fairy rainbows, Drake
    Stood with old comrades on the close-cropped green
    Of Plymouth Hoe, playing a game of bowls.
    Far off unseen, a little barque, full-sail,
    Struggled and leapt and strove tow'rds Plymouth Sound,
    Noteless as any speckled herring-gull
    Flickering between the white flakes of the waves.
    A group of schoolboys with their satchels lay
    Stretched on the green, gazing with great wide eyes
    Upon their seamen heroes, as like gods
    Disporting with the battles of the world
    They loomed, tossing black bowls like cannon-balls
    Against the rosy West, or lounged at ease
    With faces olive-dark against that sky
    Laughing, while from the neighboring inn mine host,
    White aproned and blue-jerkined, hurried out
    With foaming cups of sack, and they drank deep,
    Tossing their heads back under the golden clouds
    And burying their bearded lips. The hues
    That slashed their doublets, for the boy's bright eyes
    (Even as the gleams of Grecian cloud or moon
    Revealed the old gods) were here rich dusky streaks
    Of splendour from the Spanish Main, that shone
    But to proclaim these heroes. There a boy
    More bold crept nearer to a slouched hat thrown
    Upon the green, and touched the silver plume,
    And felt as if he had touched a sunset-isle
    Of feathery palms beyond a crimson sea.

    Another stared at the blue rings of smoke
    A storm-scarred seaman puffed from a long pipe
    Primed with the strange new herb they had lately found
    In far Virginia. But the little ship
    Now plunging into Plymouth Bay none saw.
    E'en when she had anchored and her straining boat
    Had touched the land, and the boat's crew over the quays
    Leapt with a shout, scarce was there one to heed.
    A seaman, smiling, swaggered out of the inn
    Swinging in one brown hand a gleaming cage
    Wherein a big green parrot chattered and clung
    Fluttering against the wires. A troop of girls
    With arms linked paused to watch the game of bowls;
    And now they flocked around the cage, while one
    With rosy finger tempted the horny beak
    To bite. Close overhead a sea-mew flashed
    Seaward. Once, from an open window, soft
    Through trellised leaves, not far away, a voice
    Floated, a voice that flushed the cheek of Drake,
    The voice of Bess, bending her glossy head
    Over the broidery frame, in a quiet song.

    The song ceased. Still, with rainbows in their eyes,
    The schoolboys watched the bowls like cannon-balls
    Roll from the hand of gods along the turf.

    Suddenly, tow'rds the green, a little cloud
    Of seamen, shouting, stumbling, as they ran
    Drew all eyes on them. The game ceased. A voice
    Rough with the storms of many an ocean roared
    "Drake! Cap'en Drake! The Armada!
    They are in the Channel! We sighted them--
    A line of battleships! We could not see
    An end of them. They stretch from north to south
    Like a great storm of clouds, glinting with guns,
    From sky to sky!"
                       So, after all his strife,
    The wasted weeks had tripped him, the fierce hours
    Of pleading for the sea's command, great hours
    And golden moments, all were lost. The fleet
    Of Spain had won the Channel without a blow.

    All eyes were turned on Drake, as he stood there
    A giant against the sunset and the sea
    Looming, alone. Far off, the first white star
    Gleamed in a rosy space of heaven. He tossed
    A grim black ball i' the lustrous air and laughed,--
    "Come lads," he said, "we've time to finish the game."


BOOK XI

    Few minutes, and well wasted those, were spent
    On that great game of bowls; for well knew Drake
    What panic threatened Plymouth, since his fleet
    Lay trapped there by the black head-wind that blew
    Straight up the Sound, and Plymouth town itself,
    Except the ships won seaward ere the dawn,
    Lay at the Armada's mercy. Never a seaman
    Of all the sea-dogs clustered on the quays,
    And all the captains clamouring round Lord Howard,
    Hoped that one ship might win to the open sea:
    At dawn, they thought, the Armada's rolling guns
    To windward, in an hour, must shatter them,
    Huddled in their red slaughter-house like sheep.

    Now was the great sun sunken and the night
    Dark. Far to Westward, like the soul of man
    Fighting blind nature, a wild flare of red
    Upon some windy headland suddenly leapt
    And vanished flickering into the clouds. Again
    It leapt and vanished: then all at once it streamed
    Steadily as a crimson torch upheld
    By Titan hands to heaven. It was the first
    Beacon! A sudden silence swept along
    The seething quays, and in their midst appeared
    Drake.
               Then the jubilant thunder of his voice
    Rolled, buffeting the sea-wind far and nigh,
    And ere they knew what power as of a sea
    Surged through them, his immortal battle-ship
    _Revenge_ had flung out cables to the quays,
    And while the seamen, as he had commanded,
    Knotted thick ropes together, he stood apart
    (For well he knew what panic threatened still)
    Whittling idly at a scrap of wood,
    And carved a little boat out for the child
    Of some old sea-companion.
    So great and calm a master of the world
    Seemed Drake that, as he whittled, and the chips
    Fluttered into the blackness over the quay,
    Men said that in this hour of England's need
    Each tiny flake turned to a battle-ship;
    For now began the lanthorns, one by one,
    To glitter, and half-reveal the shadowy hulks
    Before him.--So the huge old legend grew,
    Not all unworthy the Homeric age
    Of gods and god-like men.
                                 St. Michael's Mount,
    Answering the first wild beacon far away,
    Rolled crimson thunders to the stormy sky!
    The ropes were knotted. Through the panting dark
    Great heaving lines of seamen all together
    Hauled with a shout, and all together again
    Hauled with a shout against the roaring wind;
    And slowly, slowly, onward tow'rds the sea
    Moved the _Revenge_, and seaward ever heaved
    The brawny backs together, and in their midst,
    Suddenly, as they slackened, Drake was there
    Hauling like any ten, and with his heart
    Doubling the strength of all, giving them joy
    Of battle against those odds,--ay, till they found
    Delight in the burning tingle of the blood
    That even their hardy hands must feel besmear
    The harsh, rough, straining ropes. There as they toiled,
    Answering a score of hills, old Beachy Head
    Streamed like a furnace to the rolling clouds
    Then all around the coast each windy ness
    And craggy mountain kindled. Peak from peak
    Caught the tremendous fire, and passed it on
    Round the bluff East and the black mouth of Thames,--
    Up, northward to the waste wild Yorkshire fells
    And gloomy Cumberland, where, like a giant,
    Great Skiddaw grasped the red tempestuous brand,
    And thrust it up against the reeling heavens.
    Then all night long, inland, the wandering winds
    Ran wild with clamour and clash of startled bells;
    All night the cities seethed with torches, flashed
    With twenty thousand flames of burnished steel;
    While over the trample and thunder of hooves blazed forth
    The lightning of wild trumpets. Lonely lanes
    Of country darkness, lit by cottage doors
    Entwined with rose and honeysuckle, roared
    Like mountain-torrents now--East, West, and South,
    As to the coasts with pike and musket streamed
    The trained bands, horse and foot, from every town
    And every hamlet. All the shaggy hills
    From Milford Haven to the Downs of Kent,
    And up to Humber, gleamed with many a hedge
    Of pikes between the beacon's crimson glares;
    While in red London forty thousand men,
    In case the Invader should prevail, drew swords
    Around their Queen. All night in dark St. Paul's,
    While round it rolled a multitudinous roar
    As of the Atlantic on a Western beach,
    And all the leaning London streets were lit
    With fury of torches, rose the passionate prayer
    Of England's peril:
                            _O Lord God of Hosts,
    Let Thine enemies know that Thou hast taken
    England into Thine hands!_
                                  The mighty sound
    Rolled, billowing round the kneeling aisles, then died,
    Echoing up the heights. A voice, far off,
    As on the cross of Calvary, caught it up
    And poured the prayer o'er that deep hush, alone:
    _We beseech Thee, O God, to go before our armies,
    Bless and prosper them both by land and sea!
    Grant unto them Thy victory, O God,
    As Thou usedst to do to Thy children when they please Thee!
    All power, all strength, all victory come from Thee!_
    Then from the lips of all those thousands burst
    A sound as from the rent heart of an ocean,
    One tumult, one great rushing storm of wings
    Cleaving the darkness round the Gates of Heaven:
    _Some put their trust in chariots and some in horses;
    But we will remember Thy name, O Lord our God!_

    So, while at Plymouth Sound her seamen toiled
    All through the night, and scarce a ship had won
    Seaward, the heart of England cried to God.
    All night, while trumpets yelled and blared without,
    And signal cannon shook the blazoned panes,
    And billowing multitudes went thundering by,
    Amid that solemn pillared hush arose
    From lips of kneeling thousands one great prayer
    Storming the Gates of Heaven! _O Lord, our God,
    Heavenly Father, have mercy upon our Queen,
    To whom Thy far dispersed flock do fly
    In the anguish of their souls. Behold, behold,
    How many princes band themselves against her,
    How long Thy servant hath laboured to them for peace,
    How proudly they prepare themselves for battle!
    Arise, therefore! Maintain Thine own cause,
    Judge Thou between her and her enemies!
    She seeketh not her own honour, but Thine,
    Not the dominions of others, but Thy truth,
    Not bloodshed but the saving of the afflicted!
    O rend the heavens, therefore, and come down.
    Deliver Thy people!
    To vanquish is all one with Thee, by few
    Or many, ward or wealth, weakness or strength.
    The cause is Thine, the enemies Thine, the afflicted
    Thine! The honour, victory, and triumph
    Thine! Grant her people now one heart, one mind,
    One strength. Give unto her councils and her captains
    Wisdom and courage strongly to withstand
    The forces of her enemies, that the fame
    And glory of Thy Kingdom may be spread
    Unto the ends of the world. Father, we crave
    This in Thy mercy, for the precious death
    Of Thy dear Son, our Saviour, Jesus Christ!
    Amen._
    And as the dreadful dawn thro' mist-wreaths broke,
    And out of Plymouth Sound at last, with cheers
    Ringing from many a thousand throats, there struggled
    Six little ships, all that the night's long toil
    Had warped down to the sea (but leading them
    The ship of Drake) there rose one ocean-cry
    From all those worshippers--_Let God arise,
    And let His enemies be scattered!_

    Under the leaden fogs of that new dawn,
    Empty and cold, indifferent as death,
    The sea heaved strangely to the seamen's eyes,
    Seeing all round them only the leaden surge
    Wrapped in wet mists or flashing here and there
    With crumbling white. Against the cold wet wind
    Westward the little ships of England beat
    With short tacks, close inshore, striving to win
    The windward station of the threatening battle
    That neared behind the veil. Six little ships,
    No more, beat Westward, even as all mankind
    Beats up against that universal wind
    Whereon like withered leaves all else is blown
    Down one wide way to death: the soul alone,
    Whether at last it wins, or faints and fails,
    Stems the dark tide with its intrepid sails.
    Close-hauled, with many a short tack, struggled and strained,
    North-west, South-west, the ships; but ever Westward gained
    Some little way with every tack; and soon,
    While the prows plunged beneath the grey-gold noon,
    Lapped by the crackling waves, even as the wind
    Died down a little, in the mists behind
    Stole out from Plymouth Sound the struggling score
    Of ships that might not win last night to sea.
    They followed; but the Six went on before,
    Not knowing, alone, for God and Liberty.

    Now, as they tacked North-west, the sullen roar
      Of reefs crept out, or some strange tinkling sound
    Of sheep upon the hills. South-west once more
      The bo'sun's whistle swung their bowsprits round;
    South-west until the long low lapping splash
      Was all they heard, of keels that still ran out
    Seaward, then with one muffled heave and crash
      Once more the whistles brought their sails about.

    And now the noon began to wane; the west
      With slow rich colours filled and shadowy forms,
    Dark curdling wreaths and fogs with crimsoned breast,
      And tangled zones of dusk like frozen storms,

    Motionless, flagged with sunset, hulled with doom!
      Motionless? Nay, across the darkening deep
    Surely the whole sky moved its gorgeous gloom
      Onward; and like the curtains of a sleep

    The red fogs crumbled, mists dissolved away!
      There, like death's secret dawning thro' a dream,
    Great thrones of thunder dusked the dying day,
      And, higher, pale towers of cloud began to gleam.

    There, in one heaven-wide storm, great masts and clouds
      Of sail crept slowly forth, the ships of Spain!
    From North to South, their tangled spars and shrouds
      Controlled the slow wind as with bit and rein;
    Onward they rode in insolent disdain
      Sighting the little fleet of England there,
    While o'er the sullen splendour of the main
      Three solemn guns tolled all their host to prayer,
    And their great ensign blazoned all the doom-fraught air.

    The sacred standard of their proud crusade
      Up to the mast-head of their flag-ship soared:
    On one side knelt the Holy Mother-maid,
      On one the crucified Redeemer poured
    His blood, and all their kneeling hosts adored
      Their saints, and clouds of incense heavenward streamed,
    While pomp of cannonry and pike and sword
      Down long sea-lanes of mocking menace gleamed,
    And chant of priests rolled out o'er seas that darkly dreamed.

    _Who comes to fight for England?_ Is it ye,
      Six little straws that dance upon the foam?
    Ay, sweeping o'er the sunset-crimsoned sea
      Let the proud pageant in its glory come,
    Leaving the sunset like a hecatomb
      Of souls whose bodies yet endure the chain!
    Let slaves, by thousands, branded, scarred and dumb,
      In those dark galleys grip their oars again,
    And o'er the rolling deep bring on the pomp of Spain;--

    Bring on the pomp of royal paladins
      (For all the princedoms of the land are there!)
    And for the gorgeous purple of their sins
      The papal pomp bring on with psalm and prayer:
    Nearer the splendour heaves; can ye not hear
      The rushing foam, not see the blazoned arms,
    And black-faced hosts thro' leagues of golden air
      Crowding the decks, muttering their beads and charms
    To where, in furthest heaven, they thicken like locust-swarms?

    Bring on the pomp and pride of old Castille,
      Blazon the skies with royal Aragon,
    Beneath Oquendo let old ocean reel.
      The purple pomp of priestly Rome bring on;
    And let her censers dusk the dying sun,
      The thunder of her banners on the breeze
    Following Sidonia's glorious galleon
      Deride the sleeping thunder of the seas,
    While twenty thousand warriors chant her litanies.

    Lo, all their decks are kneeling! Sky to sky
      Responds! It is their solemn evening hour.
    Salve Regina, though the daylight die,
      Salve Regina, though the darkness lour;
    Have they not still the kingdom and the power?
      Salve Regina, hark, their thousands cry,
    From where like clouds to where like mountains tower
      Their crowded galleons looming far or nigh,
    Salve Regina, hark, what distant seas reply!

    What distant seas, what distant ages hear?
      Bring on the pomp! the sun of Spain goes down:
    The moon but swells the tide of praise and prayer;
      Bring on the world-wide pomp of her renown;
    Let darkness crown her with a starrier crown,
      And let her watch the fierce waves crouch and fawn
    Round those huge hulks from which her cannon frown,
      While close inshore the wet sea-mists are drawn
    Round England's Drake: then wait, in triumph, for the dawn.

    The sun of Rome goes down; the night is dark!
      Still are her thousands praying, still their cry
    Ascends from the wide waste of waters, hark!
      AVE MARIA, darker grows the sky!
    AVE MARIA, _those about to die
      Salute thee_! Nay, what wandering winds blaspheme
    With random gusts of chilling prophecy
      Against the solemn sounds that heavenward stream!
    The night is come at last. Break not the splendid dream.

        But through the misty darkness, close inshore,
        North-west, South-west, and ever Westward strained
        The little ships of England. All night long,
        As down the coast the reddening beacons leapt,
        The crackle and lapping splash of tacking keels,
        The bo'suns' low sharp whistles and the whine
        Of ropes, mixing with many a sea-bird's cry
        Disturbed the darkness, waking vague swift fears
        Among the mighty hulks of Spain that lay
        Nearest, then fading through the mists inshore
        North-west, then growing again, but farther down
        Their ranks to Westward with each dark return
        And dark departure, till the rearmost rank
        Of grim sea-castles heard the swish and creak
        Pass plashing seaward thro' the wet sea-mists
        To windward now of all that monstrous host,
        Then heard no more than wandering sea-birds' cries
        Wheeling around their leagues of lanthorn-light,
        Or heave of waters, waiting for the dawn.

    Dawn, everlasting and almighty dawn
      Rolled o'er the waters. The grey mists were fled.
    See, in their reeking heaven-wide crescent drawn
      Those masts and spars and cloudy sails, outspread
    Like one great sulphurous tempest soaked with red,
      In vain withstand the march of brightening skies:
    The dawn sweeps onward and the night is dead,
      And lo, to windward, what bright menace lies,
    What glory kindles now in England's wakening eyes?

    There, on the glittering plains of open sea,
      To windward now, behind the fleets of Spain,
    Two little files of ships are tossing free,
      Free of the winds and of the wind-swept main:
    Were they not trapped? Who brought them forth again,
      Free of the great new fields of England's war,
    With sails like blossoms shining after rain,
      And guns that sparkle to the morning star?
    Drake!--first upon the deep that rolls to Trafalgar!

    And Spain knows well that flag of fiery fame,
      Spain knows who leads those files across the sea;
    Implacable, invincible, his name
      _El Draque_, creeps hissing through her ranks to lee;
    But now she holds the rolling heavens in fee,
      His ships are few. _They surge across the foam,
    The hunt is up!_ But need the mountains flee
      Or fear the snarling wolf-pack? Let them come!
    They crouch, but dare not leap upon the flanks of Rome.

    Nearer they come and nearer! Nay, prepare!
      Close your huge ranks that sweep from sky to sky!
    Madness itself would shrink; but Drake will dare
      Eternal hell! Let the great signal fly--
    Close up your ranks; El Draque comes down to die!
      El Draque is brave! The vast sea-cities loom
    Thro' heaven: Spain spares one smile of chivalry,
      One wintry smile across her cannons' gloom
    As that frail fleet full-sail comes rushing tow'rds its doom.

    Suddenly, as the wild change of a dream,
    Even as the Spaniards watched those lean sharp prows
    Leap straight at their huge hulks, watched well content,
    Knowing their foes, once grappled, must be doomed;
    Even as they caught the rush and hiss of foam
    Across that narrow, dwindling gleam of sea,
    And heard, abruptly close, the sharp commands
    And steady British answers, caught one glimpse
    Of bare-armed seamen waiting by their guns,
    The vision changed! The ships of England swerved
    Swiftly--a volley of flame and thunder swept
    Blinding the buffeted air, a volley of iron
    From four sheer broadsides, crashing thro' a hulk
    Of Spain. She reeled, blind in the fiery surge
    And fury of that assault. So swift it seemed
    That as she heeled to leeward, ere her guns
    Trained on the foe once more, the sulphurous cloud
    That wrapped the sea, once, twice, and thrice again
    Split with red thunder-claps that rent and raked
    Her huge beams through and through. Ay, as she heeled
    To leeward still, her own grim cannon belched
    Their lava skyward, wounding the void air,
    And, as by miracle, the ships of Drake
    Were gone. Along the Spanish rear they swept
    From North to South, raking them as they went
    At close range, hardly a pistol-shot away,
    With volley on volley. Never Spain had seen
    Seamen or marksmen like to these who sailed
    Two knots against her one. They came and went,
    Suddenly neared or sheered away at will
    As if by magic, pouring flame and iron
    In four full broadsides thro' some Spanish hulk
    Ere one of hers burst blindly at the sky.
    Southward, along the Spanish rear they swept,
    Then swung about, and volleying sheets of flame,
    Iron, and death, along the same fierce road
    Littered with spars, reeking with sulphurous fumes,
    Returned, triumphantly rushing, all their sails
    Alow, aloft, full-bellied with the wind.

    Then, then, from sky to sky, one mighty surge
      Of baleful pride, huge wrath, stormy disdain,
    With shuddering clouds and towers of sail would urge
      Onward the heaving citadels of Spain,
    Which dragged earth's thunders o'er the groaning main,
      And held the panoplies of faith in fee,
    Beating against the wind, struggling in vain
      To close with that swift ocean-cavalry:
    Spain had all earth in charge! Had England, then, the sea?

    Spain had the mountains--mountains flow like clouds.
      Spain had great kingdoms--kingdoms melt away!
    Yet, in that crescent, army on army crowds,
      How shall she fear what seas or winds can say?--
    The seas that leap and shine round earth's decay,
      The winds that mount and sing while empires fall,
    And mountains pass like waves in the wind's way,
      And dying gods thro' shuddering twilights call.
    Had England, then, the sea that sweeps o'er one and all?

    See, in gigantic wrath the _Rata_ hurls
      Her mighty prows round to the wild sea-wind:
    The deep like one black maelstrom round her swirls
      While great Recaldé follows hard behind:
    Reeling, like Titans, thunder-blasted, blind,
      They strive to cross the ships of England--yea,
    Challenge them to the grapple, and only find
      Red broadsides bursting o'er the bursting spray,
    And England surging still along her windward way!

    To windward still _Revenge_ and _Raleigh_ flash
      And thunder, and the sea flames red between:
    In vain against the wind the galleons crash
      And plunge and pour blind volleys thro' the screen
    Of rolling sulphurous clouds at dimly seen
      Topsails that, to and fro, like sea-birds fly!
    Ever to leeward the great hulks careen;
      Their thousand cannon can but wound the sky,
    While England's little _Rainbow_ foams and flashes by.

    Suddenly the flag-ship of Recaldé, stung
    To fury it seemed, heeled like an avalanche
    To leeward, then reeled out beyond the rest
    Against the wind, alone, daring the foe
    To grapple her. At once the little _Revenge_
    With Drake's flag flying flashed at her throat,
    And hardly a cable's-length away out-belched
    Broadside on broadside, under those great cannon,
    Crashing through five-foot beams, four shots to one,
    While Howard and the rest swept to and fro
    Keeping at deadly bay the rolling hulks
    That looming like Leviathans now plunged
    Desperately against the freshening wind
    To rescue the great flag-ship where she lay
    Alone, amid the cannonades of Drake,
    Alone, like a volcanic island lashed
    With crimson hurricanes, dinning the winds
    With isolated thunders, flaking the skies
    With wrathful lava, while great spars and blocks
    Leapt through the cloudy glare and fell, far off,
    Like small black stones into the hissing sea.

    Oquendo saw her peril far away!
      His rushing prow thro' heaven begins to loom,
    Oquendo, first in all that proud array,
      Hath heart the pride of Spain to reassume:
    He comes; the rolling seas are dusked with gloom
      Of his great sails! Now round him once again,
    Thrust out your oars, ye mighty hulks of doom;
      Forward, with hiss of whip and clank of chain!
    Let twice ten hundred slaves bring on the wrath of Spain!

    Sidonia comes! Toledo comes!--huge ranks
      That rally against the storm from sky to sky,
    As down the dark blood-rusted chain-locked planks
      Of labouring galleys the dark slave-guards ply
    Their knotted scourges, and the red flakes fly
      From bare scarred backs that quiver and heave once more,
    And slaves that heed not if they live or die
      Pull with numb arms at many a red-stained oar,
    Nor know the sea's dull crash from cannon's growing roar.

    Bring on the wrath! From heaven to rushing heaven
      The white foam sweeps around their fierce array;
    In vain before their shattering crimson levin
      The ships of England flash and dart away:
    Not England's heart can hold that host at bay!
      See, a swift signal shoots along her line,
    Her ships are scattered, they fly, they fly like spray
      Driven against the wind by wrath divine,
    While, round Recaldé now, Sidonia's cannon shine.

    The wild sea-winds with golden trumpets blaze!
      One wave will wash away the crimson stain
    That blots Recaldé's decks. Her first amaze
      Is over: down the Channel once again
    Turns the triumphant pageantry of Spain
      In battle-order, now. Behind her, far,
    While the broad sun sinks to the Western main,
      Glitter the little ships of England's war,
    And over them in heaven glides out the first white star.

    The sun goes down: the heart of Spain is proud:
      Her censers fume, her golden trumpets blow!
    Into the darkening East with cloud on cloud
      Of broad-flung sail her huge sea-castles go:
    Rich under blazoned poops like rose-flushed snow
      Tosses the foam. Far off the sunset gleams:
    Her banners like a thousand sunsets glow,
      As down the darkening East the pageant streams,
    Full-fraught with doom for England, rigged with princely dreams.

    Nay, "rigged with curses dark," as o'er the waves
    Drake watched them slowly sweeping into the gloom
    That thickened down the Channel, watched them go
    In ranks compact, roundels impregnable,
    With Biscay's bristling broad-beamed squadron drawn
    Behind for rear-guard. As the sun went down
    Drake flew the council-flag. Across the sea
    That gleamed still like a myriad-petalled rose
    Up to the little _Revenge_ the pinnaces foamed.

    There, on Drake's powder-grimed escutcheoned poop
    They gathered, Admirals and great flag-captains,
    Hawking, Frobisher, shining names and famous,
    And some content to serve and follow and fight
    Where duty called unknown, but heroes all.
    High on the poop they clustered, gazing East
    With faces dark as iron against the flame
    Of sunset, eagle-faces, iron lips,
    And keen eyes fiercely flashing as they turned
    Like sword-flames now, or dark and deep as night
    Watching the vast Armada slowly mix
    Its broad-flung sails with twilight where it dragged
    Thro' thickening heavens its curdled storms of clouds
    Down the wide darkening Channel.
                                         "My Lord Howard,"
    Said Drake, "it seems we have but scarred the skins
    Of those huge hulks: the hour grows late for England.
    'Twere well to handle them again at once." A growl
    Of fierce approval answered; but Lord Howard
    Cried out, "Attack we cannot, save at risk
    Of our whole fleet. It is not death I fear,
    But England's peril. We have fought all day,
    Accomplished nothing. Half our powder is spent!
    I think it best to hang upon their flanks
    Till we be reinforced."
                          "My lord," said Drake,
    "Had we that week to spare for which I prayed,
    And were we handling them in Spanish seas,
    We might delay. There is no choosing now.
    Yon hulks of doom are steadfastly resolved
    On one tremendous path and solid end--
    To join their powers with Parma's thirty thousand
    (Not heeding our light horsemen of the sea),
    Then in one earthquake of o'erwhelming arms
    Roll Europe over England. They've not grasped
    The first poor thought which now and evermore
    Must be the sceptre of Britain, the steel trident
    Of ocean-sovereignty. That mighty fleet
    Invincible, impregnable, omnipotent,
    Must here and now be shattered, never be joined
    With Parma, never abase the wind-swept sea,
    With oaken roads for thundering legions
    To trample in the splendour of the sun
    From Europe to our island.
                                  As for food,
    In yonder enemy's fleet there is food enough
    To feed a nation; ay, and powder enough
    To split an empire. I will answer for it
    Ye shall not lack of either, nor for shot,
    Not though ye pluck them out of your own beams
    To feed your hungry cannon. Cast your bread
    Upon the waters. Think not of the Queen!
    She will not send it! For she hath not known
    (How could she know?) this wide new realm of hers,
    When we ourselves--her seamen--scarce have learnt
    What means this kingdom of the ocean-sea
    To England and her throne--food, life-blood, life!
    She could not understand who, when our ships
    Put out from Plymouth, hardly gave them store
    Of powder and shot to last three fighting days,
    Or rations even for those. Blame not the Queen,
    Who hath striven for England as no king hath fought
    Since England was a nation. Bear with me,
    For I must pour my heart before you now
    This one last time. Yon fishing-boats have brought
    Tidings how on this very day she rode
    Before her mustered pikes at Tilbury.
    Methinks I see her riding down their lines
    High on her milk-white Barbary charger, hear
    Her voice--'My people, though my flesh be woman,
    My heart is of your kingly lion's breed:
    I come myself to lead you!' I see the sun
    Shining upon her armour, hear the voice
    Of all her armies roaring like one sea--
    _God save Elizabeth, our English Queen!_
    'God save her,' I say, too; but still she dreams,
    As all too many of us--bear with me!--dream,
    Of Crécy, when our England's war was thus;
    When we, too, hurled our hosts across the deep
    As now Spain dreams to hurl them on our isle.
    But now our war is otherwise. We claim
    The sea's command, and Spain shall never land
    One swordsman on our island. Blame her not,
    But look not to the Queen. The people fight
    This war of ours, not princes. In this hour
    God maketh us a people. We have seen
    Victories, never victory like to this,
    When in our England's darkest hour of need
    Her seamen, without wage, powder, or food,
    Are yet on fire to fight for her. Your ships
    Tossing in the great sunset of an Empire,
    Dawn of a sovereign people, are all manned
    By heroes, raggèd, hungry, who will die
    Like flies ere long, because they have no food
    But turns to fever-breeding carrion
    Not fit for dogs. They are half-naked, hopeless
    Living, of any reward; and if they die
    They die a dog's death. We shall reap the fame
    While they--great God! and all this cannot quench
    The glory in their eyes. They will be served
    Six at the mess of four, eking it out
    With what their own rude nets may catch by night,
    Silvering the guns and naked arms that haul
    Under the stars with silver past all price,
    While some small ship-boy in the black crow's nest
    Watches across the waters for the foe.
    My lord, it is a terrible thing for Spain
    When poor men thus go out against her princes;
    For so God whispers 'Victory' in our ears,
    I cannot dare to doubt it."

                                 Once again
    A growl of fierce approval answered him,
    And Hawkins cried--"I stand by Francis Drake";
    But Howard, clinging to his old-world order,
    Yet with such manly strength as dared to rank
    Drake's wisdom of the sea above his own,
    Sturdily shook his head. "I dare not risk
    A close attack. Once grappled we are doomed.
    We'll follow on their trail no less, with Drake
    Leading. Our oriflamme to-night shall be
    His cresset and stern-lanthorn. Where that shines
    We follow."

                  Drake, still thinking in his heart,--
    "And if Spain be not shattered here and now
    We are doomed no less," must even rest content
    With that good vantage.
                                As the sunset died
    Over the darkling emerald seas that swelled
    Before the freshening wind, the pinnaces dashed
    To their own ships; and into the mind of Drake
    There stole a plot that twitched his lips to a smile.
    High on the heaving purple of the poop
    Under the glimmer of firm and full-blown sails
    He stood, an iron statue, glancing back
    Anon at his stern-cresset's crimson flare,
    The star of all the shadowy ships that plunged
    Like ghosts amid the grey stream of his wake,
    And all around him heard the low keen song
    Of hidden ropes above the wail and creak
    Of blocks and long low swish of cloven foam,
    A keen rope-music in the formless night,
    A harmony, a strong intent good sound,
    Well-strung and taut, singing the will of man.
    "Your oriflamme," he muttered,--"so you travail
    With sea-speech in the tongue of old Poictiers--
    Shall be my own stern-lanthorn. Watch it well,
    My good Lord Howard."
                               Over the surging seas
    The little _Revenge_ went swooping on the trail,
    Leading the ships of England. One by one
    Out of the gloom before them slowly crept,
    Sinister gleam by gleam, like blood-red stars,
    The rearmost lanthorns of the Spanish Fleet,
    A shaggy purple sky of secret storm
    Heaving from north to south upon the black
    Breast of the waters. Once again with lips
    Twitched to a smile, Drake suddenly bade them crowd
    All sail upon the little _Revenge_. She leapt
    Forward. Smiling he watched the widening gap
    Between the ships that followed and her light,
    Then as to those behind, its flicker must seem
    Wellnigh confused with those of Spain, he cried,
    "Now, master bo'sun, quench their oriflamme,
    Dip their damned cresset in the good black Sea!
    The rearmost light of Spain shall lead them now,
    A little closer, if they think it ours.
    Pray God, they come to blows!"
                                       Even as he spake
    His cresset-flare went out in the thick night;
    A fluttering as of blind bewildered moths
    A moment seized upon the shadowy ships
    Behind him, then with crowded sail they steered
    Straight for the rearmost cresset-flare of Spain.


BOOK XII

    Meanwhile, as in the gloom he slipped aside
    Along the Spanish ranks, waiting the crash
    Of battle, suddenly Drake became aware
    Of strange sails bearing up into the wind
    Around his right, and thought, "the Armada strives
    To weather us in the dark." Down went his helm,
    And all alone the little _Revenge_ gave chase,
    Till as the moon crept slowly forth, she stood
    Beside the ghostly ships, only to see
    Bewildered Flemish merchantmen, amazed
    With fears of Armageddon--such vast shrouds
    Had lately passed them on the rolling seas.
    Down went his helm again, with one grim curse
    Upon the chance that led him thus astray;
    And down the wind the little _Revenge_ once more
    Swept on the trail. Fainter and fainter now
    Glared the red beacons on the British coasts,
    And the wind slackened and the glimmering East
    Greyed and reddened, yet Drake had not regained
    Sight of the ships. When the full glory of dawn
    Dazzled the sea, he found himself alone,
    With one huge galleon helplessly drifting
    A cable's-length away. Around her prow,
    _Nuestra Señora del Rosario_,
    Richly emblazoned, gold on red, proclaimed
    The flagship of great Valdes, of the fleet
    Of Andalusia, captain-general. She,
    Last night, in dark collision with the hulks
    Of Spain, had lost her foremast. Through the night
    Her guns, long rank on deadly rank, had kept
    All enemies at bay. Drake summoned her
    Instantly to surrender. She returned
    A scornful answer from the glittering poop
    Where two-score officers crowned the golden sea
    And stained the dawn with blots of richer colour
    Loftily clustered in the glowing sky,
    Doubleted with cramoisy velvet, wreathed
    With golden chains, blazing with jewelled swords
    And crusted poignards. "What proud haste was this?"
    They asked, glancing at their huge tiers of cannon
    And crowded decks of swarthy soldiery;
    "What madman in yon cockle-shell defied Spain?"
                  "Tell them it is El Draque," he said, "who lacks
    The time to parley; therefore it will be well
    They strike at once, for I am in great haste."
    There, at the sound of that renownèd name,
    Without a word down came their blazoned flag.
    Like a great fragment of the dawn it lay
    Crumpled upon their decks.. . .

    Into the soft bloom and Italian blue
    Of sparkling, ever-beautiful Torbay,
    Belted as with warm Mediterranean crags,
    The little _Revenge_ foamed with her mighty prize,
    A prize indeed--not for the casks of gold
    Drake split in the rich sunlight and poured out
    Like dross amongst his men, but in her hold
    Lay many tons of powder, worth their weight
    In rubies now to Britain. Into the hands
    Of swarthy Brixham fishermen he gave
    Prisoners and prize, then--loaded stem to stern
    With powder and shot--their swiftest trawlers flew
    Like falcons following a thunder-cloud
    Behind him, as with crowded sail he rushed
    On England's trail once more. Like a caged lion
    Drake paced his deck, praying he yet might reach
    The fight in time; and ever the warm light wind
    Slackened. Not till the sun was half-way fallen
    Once more crept out in front those dusky thrones
    Of thunder, heaving on the smooth bright sea
    From North to South with Howard's clustered fleet
    Like tiny clouds, becalmed, not half a mile
    Behind the Spaniards. For the breeze had failed
    Their blind midnight pursuit; and now attack
    Seemed hopeless. Even as Drake drew nigh, the last
    Breath of the wind sank. One more day had flown,
    Nought was accomplished; and the Armada lay
    Some leagues of golden sea-way nearer now
    To its great goal. The sun went down: the moon
    Rose glittering. Hardly a cannon-shot apart
    The two fleets lay becalmed upon the silver
    Swell of the smooth night-tide. The hour had come
    For Spain to strike. The ships of England drifted
    Helplessly, at the mercy of those great hulks
    Oared by their thousand slaves.
                                     Onward they came,
    Swinging suddenly in tremendous gloom
    Over the silver seas. But even as Drake,
    With eyes on fire at last for his last fight,
    Measured the distance ere he gave the word
    To greet it with his cannon, suddenly
    The shining face of the deep began to shiver
    With dusky patches: the doomed English sails
    Quivered and, filling smart from the North-east,
    The little _Revenge_ rushed down their broken line
    Signalling them to follow, and ere they knew
    What miracle had saved them, they all sprang
    Their luff and ran large out to sea. For now
    The Armada lay to windward, and to fight
    Meant to be grappled and overwhelmed; but dark
    Within the mind of Drake, a fiercer plan
    Already had shaped itself.
                              "They fly! They fly!"
    Rending the heavens from twice ten thousand throats
    A mighty shout rose from the Spanish Fleet.
    Over the moonlit waves their galleons came
    Towering, crowding, plunging down the wind
    In full chase, while the tempter, Drake, laughed low
    To watch their solid battle-order break
    And straggle. When once more the golden dawn
    Dazzled the deep, the labouring galleons lay
    Scattered by their unequal speed. The wind
    Veered as the sun rose. Once again the ships
    Of England lay to windward. Down swooped Drake
    Where like a mountain the _San Marcos_ heaved
    Her giant flanks alone, having out-sailed
    Her huge companions. Then the sea-winds blazed
    With broadsides. Two long hours the sea flamed red
    All round her. One by one the Titan ships
    Came surging to her rescue, and met the buffet
    Of battle-thunders, belching iron and flame;
    Nor could they pluck her forth from that red chaos
    Till great Oquendo hurled his mighty prows
    Crashing athwart those thunders, and once more
    Gathered into unshakeable battle-order
    The whole Armada raked the reeking seas.
    Then up the wind the ships of England sheered
    Once more, and one more day drew to its close,
    With little accomplished, half their powder spent,
    And all the Armada moving as of old,
    From sky to sky one heaven-wide zone of storm,
    (Though some three galleons out of all their host
    Laboured woundily) down the darkening Channel.
    And all night long on England's guardian heights
    The beacons reddened, and all the next long day
    The impregnable Armada never swerved
    From its tremendous path. In vain did Drake,
    Frobisher, Hawkins, Howard, greatest names
    In all our great sea-history, hover and dart
    Like falcons round the mountainous array.
    Till now, as night fell and they lay abreast
    Of the Isle of Wight, once more the council flag
    Flew from the little _Revenge_. With iron face
    Thrust close to Howard's, and outstretched iron arm,
    Under the stars Drake pointed down the coast
    Where the red beacons flared. "The shoals," he hissed,
    "The shoals from Owers to Spithead and the net
    Of channels yonder in Portsmouth Roads. At dawn
    They'll lie to leeward of the Invincible Fleet!"

              Swiftly, in mighty sweeping lines Drake set
    Before the council his fierce battle-plan
    To drive the Armada down upon the banks
    And utterly shatter it--stroke by well-schemed stroke
    As he unfolded there his vital plot
    And touched their dead cold warfare into life
    Where plan before was none, he seemed to tower
    Above them, clad with the deep night of stars;
    And those that late would rival knew him now,
    In all his great simplicity, their king,
    One of the gods of battle, England's Drake,
    A soul that summoned Cæsar from his grave,
    And swept with Alexander o'er the deep.

    So when the dawn thro' rolling wreaths of cloud
    Struggled, and all the waves were molten gold,
    The heart of Spain exulted, for she saw
    The little fleet of England cloven in twain
    As if by some strange discord. A light breeze
    Blew from the ripening East; and, up against it,
    Urged by the very madness of defeat,
    Or so it seemed, one half the British fleet
    Drew nigh, towed by their boats, to challenge the vast
    Tempest-winged heaving citadels of Spain,
    At last to the murderous grapple; while far away
    Their other half, led by the flag of Drake,
    Stood out to sea, as if to escape the doom
    Of that sheer madness, for the light wind now
    Could lend them no such wings to hover and swoop
    As heretofore. Nearer the mad ships came
    Towed by their boats, till now upon their right
    To windward loomed the Fleet Invincible
    With all its thunder-clouds, and on their left
    To leeward, gleamed the perilous white shoals
    With their long level lightnings under the cliffs
    Of England, from the green glad garden of Wight
    To the Owers and Selsea Bill. Right on they came,
    And suddenly the wrench of thundering cannon
    Shook the vast hulks that towered above them. Red
    Flamed the blue sea between. Thunder to thunder
    Answered, and still the ships of Drake sped out
    To the open sea. Sidonia saw them go,
    Furrowing the deep that like a pale-blue shield
    Lay diamond-dazzled now in the full light.
    Rich was the omen of that day for Spain,
    The feast-day of Sidonia's patron-saint!
    And the priests chanted and the trumpets blew
    Triumphantly! A universal shout
    Went skyward from the locust-swarming decks,
    A shout that rent the golden morning clouds
    From heaven to menacing heaven, as castle to castle
    Flew the great battle-signal, and like one range
    Of moving mountains, those almighty ranks
    Swept down upon the small forsaken ships!
    The lion's brood was in the imperial nets
    Of Spain at last. Onward the mountains came
    With all their golden clouds of sail and flags
    Like streaming cataracts; all their glorious chasms
    And glittering steeps, echoing, re-echoing,
    Calling, answering, as with the herald winds
    That blow the golden trumpets of the morning
    From Skiddaw to Helvellyn. In the midst
    The great _San Martin_ surged with heaven-wide press
    Of proudly billowing sail; and yet once more
    Slowly, solemnly, like another dawn
    Up to her mast-head soared in thunderous gold
    The sacred standard of their last crusade;
    While round a hundred prows that heaved thro' heaven
    Like granite cliffs, their black wet shining flanks,
    And swept like moving promontories, rolled
    The splendid long-drawn thunders of the foam,
    And flashed the untamed white lightnings of the sea
    Back to a morn unhalyarded of man,
    Back to the unleashed sun and blazoned clouds
    And azure sky--the unfettered flag of God.

       *   *   *   *

    Like one huge moving coast-line on they came
      Crashing, and closed the ships of England round
    With one fierce crescent of thunder and sweeping flame,
      One crimson scythe of Death, whose long sweep drowned
    The eternal ocean with its mighty sound,
      From heaven to heaven, one roar, one glitter of doom,
    While out to the sea-line's blue remotest bound
      The ships of Drake still fled, and the red fume
    Of battle thickened and shrouded shoal and sea with gloom.

    The distant sea, the close white menacing shoals
      Are shrouded! And the lion's brood fight on!
    And now death's very midnight round them rolls;
      Rent is the flag that late so proudly shone!
    The red decks reel and their last hope seems gone!
      Round them they still keep clear one ring of sea:
    It narrows; but the lion's brood fight on,
      Ungrappled still, still fearless and still free,
    While the white menacing shoals creep slowly out to lee.

    Now through the red rents of each fire-cleft cloud,
      High o'er the British blood-greased decks flash out
    Thousands of swarthy faces, crowd on crowd
      Surging, with one tremendous hurricane shout
    _On, to the grapple_! and still the grim redoubt
      Of the oaken bulwarks rolls them back again,
    As buffeted waves that shatter in the furious bout
      When cannonading cliffs meet the full main
    And hurl it back in smoke--so Britain hurls back Spain;

    Hurls her back, only to see her return,
      Darkening the heavens with billow on billow of sail:
    Round that huge storm the waves like lava burn,
      The daylight withers, and the sea-winds fail!
    Seamen of England, what shall now avail
      Your naked arms? Before those blasts of doom
    The sun is quenched, the very sea-waves quail:
      High overhead their triumphing thousands loom,
    When hark! what low deep guns to windward suddenly boom?

    What low deep strange new thunders far away
      Respond to the triumphant shout of Spain?
    Is it the wind that shakes their giant array?
      Is it the deep wrath of the rising main?
    Is it--_El Draque_? El Draque! Ay, shout again,
      His thunders burst upon your windward flanks;
    The shoals creep out to leeward! Is it plain
      At last, what earthquake heaves your herded ranks
    Huddled in huge dismay tow'rds those white foam-swept banks?

    Plain, it was plain at last, what cunning lured,
    What courage held them over the jaws o' the pit,
    Till Drake could hurl them down. The little ships
    Of Howard and Frobisher, towed by their boats,
    Slipped away in the smoke, while out at sea
    Drake, with a gale of wind behind him, crashed
    Volley on volley into the helpless rear
    Of Spain and drove it down, huddling the whole
    Invincible Fleet together upon the verge
    Of doom. One awful surge of stormy wrath
    Heaved thro' the struggling citadels of Spain.
    From East to West their desperate signal flew,
    And like a drove of bullocks, with the foam
    Flecking their giant sides, they staggered and swerved,
    Careening tow'rds the shallows as they turned,
    Then in one wild stampede of sheer dismay
    Rushed, tacking seaward, while the grey sea-plain
    Smoked round them, and the cannonades of Drake
    Raked their wild flight; and the crusading flag,
    Tangled in one black maze of crashing spars,
    Whirled downward like the pride of Lucifer
    From heaven to hell.
                            Out tow'rds the coasts of France
    They plunged, narrowly weathering the Ower banks;
    Then, once again, they formed in ranks compact,
    Roundels impregnable, wrathfully bent at last
    Never to swerve again from their huge path
    And solid end--to join with Parma's host,
    And hurl the whole of Europe on our isle.
    Another day was gone, much powder spent;
    And, while Lord Howard exulted and conferred
    Knighthoods on his brave seamen, Drake alone
    Knew that his mighty plan, in spite of all,
    Had failed, knew that wellnigh his last great chance
    Was lost of wrecking the Spaniards ere they joined
    Parma. The night went by, and the next day,
    With scarce a visible scar the Invincible Fleet
    Drew onwards tow'rds its goal, unshakeable now
    In that grim battle-order. Beacons flared
    Along the British coast, and pikes flashed out
    All night, and a strange dread began to grip
    The heart of England, as it seemed the might
    Of seamen most renowned in all the world
    Checked not that huge advance. Yet at the heart
    Of Spain no less there clung a vampire fear
    And strange foreboding, as the next day passed
    Quietly, and behind her all day long
    The shadowy ships of Drake stood on her trail
    Quietly, patiently, as death or doom,
    Unswerving and implacable.
                                    While the sun
    Sank thro' long crimson fringes on that eve.
    The fleets were passing Calais and the wind
    Blew fair behind them. A strange impulse seized
    Spain to shake off those bloodhounds from her trail,
    And suddenly the whole Invincible Fleet
    Anchored, in hope the following wind would bear
    The ships of England past and carry them down
    To leeward. But their grim insistent watch
    Was ready; and though their van had wellnigh crashed
    Into the rear of Spain, in the golden dusk,
    They, too, a cannon-shot away, at once
    Anchored, to windward still.
                                  Quietly heaved
    The golden sea in that tremendous hour
    Fraught with the fate of Europe and mankind,
    As yet once more the flag of council flew,
    And Hawkins, Howard, Frobisher, and Drake
    Gathered together upon the little _Revenge_
    While like a triumphing fire the news was borne
    To Spain, already, that the Invincible Fleet
    Had reached its end, ay, and "that great black dog
    Sir Francis Drake" was writhing now in chains
    Beneath the torturer's hands.
                                   High on his poop
    He stood, a granite rock, above the throng
    Of captains, there amid the breaking waves
    Of clashing thought and swift opinion,
    Silent, gazing where now the cool fresh wind
    Blew steadily up the terrible North Sea
    Which rolled under the clouds into a gloom
    Unfathomable. Once only his lips moved
    Half-consciously, breathing those mighty words,
    _The clouds His chariot_! Then, suddenly, he turned
    And looked upon the little flock of ships
    That followed on the fleet of England, sloops
    Helpless in fight. These, manned by the brave zeal
    Of many a noble house, from hour to hour
    Had plunged out from the coast to join his flag.
    "Better if they had brought us powder and food
    Than sought to join us thus," he had growled; but now
    "Lord God," he cried aloud, "they'll light our road
    To victory yet!" And in great sweeping strokes
    Once more he drew his mighty battle-plan
    Before the captains. In the thickening gloom
    They stared at his grim face as at a man
    Risen from hell, with all the powers of hell
    At his command, a face tempered like steel
    In the everlasting furnaces, a rock
    Of adamant, while with a voice that blent
    With the ebb and flow of the everlasting sea
    He spake, and at the low deep menacing words
    Monotonous with the unconquerable
    Passion and level strength of his great soul
    They shuddered; for the man seemed more than man,
    And from his iron lips resounded doom
    As from the lips of cannon, doom to Spain,
    Inevitable, unconquerable doom.

    And through that mighty host of Spain there crept
      Cold winds of fear, as to the darkening sky
    Once more from lips of kneeling thousands swept
      The vespers of an Empire--one vast cry,
    SALVE REGINA! God, what wild reply
      Hissed from the clouds in that dark hour of dreams?
    AVE MARIA, _those about to die
      Salute thee_! See, what ghostly pageant streams
    Above them? What thin hands point down like pale moonbeams?

    Thick as the ghosts that Dante saw in hell
      Whirled on the blast thro' boundless leagues of pain,
    Thick, thick as wind-blown leaves innumerable,
      In the Inquisition's yellow robes her slain
    And tortured thousands, dense as the red rain
      That wellnigh quenched her fires, went hissing by
    With twisted shapes, raw from the racks of Spain,
      Salve Regina!--rushing thro' the sky,
    And pale hands pointing down and lips that mocked her cry,

    Ten thousand times ten thousand!--what are these
      That are arrayed in yellow robes and sweep
    Between your prayers and God like phantom seas
      Prophesying over your masts? Could Rome not keep
    The keys? Who loosed these dead to break your sleep?
      SALVE REGINA, cry, yea, cry aloud.
    AVE MARIA! Ye have sown: shall ye not reap?
      SALVE REGINA! Christ, what fiery cloud
    Suddenly rolls to windward, high o'er mast and shroud?

    Are hell-gates burst at last? For the black deep
      To windward burns with streaming crimson fires!
    Over the wild strange waves, they shudder and creep
      Nearer--strange smoke-wreathed masts and spars, red
        spires
    And blazing hulks, vast roaring blood-red pyres,
      Fierce as the flames ye fed with flesh of men
    Amid the imperial pomp and chanting choirs
      Of Alva--from El Draque's red hand again
    Sweep the wild fire-ships down upon the Fleet of Spain.

    Onward before the freshening wind they come
      Full fraught with all the terrors, all the bale
    That flamed so long for the delight of Rome,
      The shrieking fires that struck the sunlight pale,
    The avenging fires at last! Now what avail
      Your thousand ranks of cannon? Swift, cut free,
    Cut your scorched cables! Cry, reel backward, quail,
      Crash your huge huddled ranks together, flee!
    Behind you roars the fire, before--the dark North Sea!

    Dawn, everlasting and omnipotent
    Dawn rolled in crimson o'er the spar-strewn waves,
    As the last trumpet shall in thunder roll
    O'er heaven and earth and ocean. Far away,
    The ships of Spain, great ragged piles of gloom
    And shaggy splendour, leaning to the North
    Like sun-shot clouds confused, or rent apart
    In scattered squadrons, furiously plunged,
    Burying their mighty prows i' the broad grey rush
    Of smoking billowy hills, or heaving high
    Their giant bowsprits to the wandering heavens,
    Labouring in vain to return, struggling to lock
    Their far-flung ranks anew, but drifting still
    To leeward, driven by the ever-increasing storm
    Straight for the dark North Sea. Hard by there lurched
    One gorgeous galleon on the ravening shoals,
    Feeding the white maw of the famished waves
    With gold and purple webs from kingly looms
    And spilth of world-wide empires. Howard, still
    Planning to pluck the Armada plume by plume,
    Swooped down upon that prey and swiftly engaged
    Her desperate guns; while Drake, our ocean-king,
    Knowing the full worth of that doom-fraught hour,
    Glanced neither to the left nor right, but stood
    High on his poop, with calm implacable face
    Gazing as into eternity, and steered
    The crowded glory of his dawn-flushed sails
    In superb onset, straight for the great fleet
    Invincible; and after him the main
    Of England's fleet, knowing its captain now,
    Followed, and with them rushed--from sky to sky
    One glittering charge of wrath--the storm's white waves,
    The twenty thousand foaming chariots
    Of God.
                 None but the everlasting voice
    Of him who fought at Salamis might sing
    The fight of that dread Sabbath. Not mankind
    Waged it alone. War raged in heaven that day,
    Where Michael and his angels drave once more
    The hosts of darkness ruining down the abyss
    Of chaos. Light against darkness, Liberty
    Against all dark old despotism, unsheathed
    The sword in that great hour. Behind the strife
    Of men embattled deeps beyond all thought
    Moved in their awful panoply, as move
    Silent, invisible, swift, under the clash
    Of waves and flash of foam, huge ocean-glooms
    And vast reserves of inappellable power.
    The bowsprits ranked on either fore-front seemed
    But spear-heads of those dread antagonists
    Invisible: the shuddering sails of Spain
    Dusk with the shadow of death, the sunward sails
    Of England full-fraught with the breath of God.
    Onward the ships of England and God's waves
    Triumphantly charged, glittering companions,
    And poured their thunders on the extreme right
    Of Spain, whose giant galleons as they lurched
    Heavily to the roughening sea and wind
    With all their grinding, wrenching cannon, worked
    On rolling platforms by the helpless hands
    Of twenty thousand soldiers, without skill
    In stormy seas, rent the indifferent sky
    Or tore the black troughs of the swirling deep
    In vain, while volley on volley of flame and iron
    Burst thro' their four-foot beams, fierce raking blasts
    From ships that came and went on wings of the wind
    All round their mangled bulk, scarce a pike's thrust
    Away, sweeping their decks from stem to stern
    (Between the rush and roar of the great green waves)
    With crimson death, rending their timbered towns
    And populous floating streets into wild squares
    Of slaughter and devastation; driving them down,
    Huddled on their own centre, cities of shame
    And havoc, in fiery forests of tangled wrath,
    With hurricanes of huge masts and swarming spars
    And multitudinous decks that heaved and sank
    Like earthquake-smitten palaces, when doom
    Comes, with one stride, across the pomp of kings.
    All round them shouted the everlasting sea,
    Burst in white thunders on the streaming poops
    And blinded fifty thousand eyes with spray.
    Once, as a gorgeous galleon, drenched with blood
    Began to founder and settle, a British captain
    Called from his bulwarks, bidding her fierce crew
    Surrender and come aboard. Straight through the heart
    A hundred muskets answered that appeal.
    _Sink or destroy_! The deadly signal flew
    From mast to mast of England. Once, twice, thrice,
    A huge sea-castle heaved her haggled bulk
    Heavenward, and with a cry that rent the heavens
    From all her crowded decks, and one deep roar
    As of a cloven world or the dark surge
    Of chaos yawning, sank: the swirling slopes
    Of the sweeping billowy hills for a moment swarmed
    With struggling insect-men, sprinkling the foam
    With tossing arms; then the indifferent sea
    Rolled its grey smoking waves across the place
    Where they had been. Here a great galleasse poured
    Red rivers through her scuppers and torn flanks,
    And there a galleon, wrapped in creeping fire,
    Suddenly like a vast volcano split
    Asunder, and o'er the vomiting sulphurous clouds
    And spouting spread of crimson, flying spars
    And heads torn from their trunks and scattered limbs
    Leapt, hideous gouts of death, against the glare.
    Hardly the thrust of a pike away, the ships
    Of England flashed and swerved, till in one mass
    Of thunder-blasted splendour and shuddering gloom
    Those gorgeous floating citadels huddled and shrank
    Their towers, and all the glory of dawn that rolled
    And burned along the tempest of their banners
    Withered, as on a murderer's face the light
    Withers before the accuser. All their proud
    Castles and towers and heaven-wide clouds of sail
    Shrank to a darkening horror, like the heart
    Of Evil, plucked from midnight's fiercest gloom,
    With all its curses quivering and alive;
    A horror of wild masts and tangled spars,
    Like some great kraken with a thousand arms
    Torn from the filthiest cavern of the deep,
    Writhing, and spewing forth its venomous fumes
    On every side. _Sink or destroy_!--all day
    The deadly signal flew; and ever the sea
    Swelled higher, and the flashes of the foam
    Broadened and leapt and spread as a wild white fire
    That flourishes with the wind; and ever the storm
    Drave the grim battle onward to the wild
    Menace of the dark North Sea. At set of sun,
    Even as below the sea-line the broad disc
    Sank like a red-hot cannon-ball through scurf
    Of seething molten lead, the _Santa Maria_
    Uttering one cry that split the heart of heaven
    Went down with all hands, roaring into the dark.
    Hardly five rounds of shot were left to Drake!
    Gun after gun fell silent, as the night
    Deepened--"Yet we must follow them to the North,"
    He cried, "or they'll return yet to shake hands
    With Parma! Come, we'll put a brag upon it,
    And hunt them onward as we lacked for nought!"
    So, when across the swinging smoking seas,
    Grey and splendid and terrible broke the day
    Once more, the flying Invincible fleet beheld
    Upon their weather-beam, and dogging them
    Like their own shadow, the dark ships of Drake,
    Unswerving and implacable. Ever the wind
    And sea increased; till now the heaving deep
    Swelled all around them into sulky hills
    And rolling mountains, whose majestic crests,
    Like wild white flames far blown and savagely flickering
    Swept thro' the clouds; and, on their vanishing slopes,
    Past the pursuing fleet began to swirl
    Scores of horses and mules, drowning or drowned,
    Cast overboard to lighten the wild flight
    Of Spain, and save her water-casks, a trail
    Telling of utmost fear. And ever the storm
    Soared louder across the leagues of rioting sea,
    Driving her onward like a mighty stag
    Chased by the wolves. Off the dark Firth of Forth
    At last, Drake signalled and lay head to wind,
    Watching. "The chariots of God are twenty thousand,"
    He muttered, as, for a moment close at hand,
    Caught in some league-wide whirlpool of the sea,
    The mighty galleons crowded and towered and plunged
    Above him on the huge o'erhanging billows,
    As if to crash down on his decks; the next,
    A mile of ravening sea had swept between
    Each of those wind-whipt straws and they were gone,
    With all their tiny shrivelling scrolls of sail,
    Through roaring deserts of embattled death,
    Where like a hundred thousand chariots charged
    With lightnings and with thunders, the great deep
    Hurled them away to the North. From sky to sky
    One blanching bursting storm of infinite seas
    Followed them, broad white cataracts, hills that grasped
    With struggling Titan hands at reeling heavens,
    And roared their doom-fraught greetings from Cape Wrath
    Round to the Bloody Foreland.
                                       There should the yeast
    Of foam receive the purple of many kings,
    And the grim gulfs devour the blood-bought gold
    Of Aztecs and of Incas, and the reefs,
    League after league, bristle with mangled spars,
    And all along their coasts the murderous kerns
    Of Catholic Ireland strip the gorgeous silks
    And chains and jewel-encrusted crucifixes
    From thousands dead, and slaughter thousands more
    With gallow-glass axes as they blindly crept
    Forth from the surf and jagged rocks to seek
    Pity of their own creed.
                                To meet that doom
    Drake watched their sails go shrivelling, till the last
    Flicker of spars vanished as a skeleton leaf
    Upon the blasts of winter, and there was nought
    But one wide wilderness of splendour and gloom
    Under the northern clouds.
                                "Not unto us,"
    Cried Drake, "not unto us--but unto Him
    Who made the sea, belongs our England now!
    Pray God that heart and mind and soul we prove
    Worthy among the nations of this hour
    And this great victory, whose ocean fame
    Shall wash the world with thunder till that day
    When there is no more sea, and the strong cliffs
    Pass like a smoke, and the last peal of it
    Sounds thro' the trumpet."
                                    So, with close-hauled sails,
    Over the rolling triumph of the deep,
    Lifting their hearts to heaven, they turned back home.


MIST IN THE VALLEY


    I

    Mist in the valley, weeping mist
      Beset my homeward way.
    No gleam of rose or amethyst
      Hallowed the parting day;
    A shroud, a shroud of awful grey
      Wrapped every woodland brow,
    And drooped in crumbling disarray
      Around each wintry bough.


    II

    And closer round me now it clung
      Until I scarce could see
    The stealthy pathway overhung
      By silent tree and tree
    Which floated in that mystery
      As--poised in waveless deeps--
    Branching in worlds below the sea,
      The grey sea-forest sleeps.


    III

    Mist in the valley, mist no less
      Within my groping mind!
    The stile swam out: a wilderness
      Rolled round it, grey and blind.
    A yard in front, a yard behind,
      So strait my world was grown,
    I stooped to win once more some kind
      Glimmer of twig or stone.


    IV

    I crossed and lost the friendly stile
      And listened. Never a sound
    Came to me. Mile on mile on mile
      It seemed the world around
    Beneath some infinite sea lay drowned
      With all that e'er drew breath;
    Whilst I, alone, had strangely found
      A moment's life in death.


    V

    A universe of lifeless grey
      Oppressed me overhead.
    Below, a yard of clinging clay
      With rotting foliage red
    Glimmered. The stillness of the dead,
      Hark!--was it broken now
    By the slow drip of tears that bled
      From hidden heart or bough.


    VI

    Mist in the valley, mist no less
      That muffled every cry
    Across the soul's grey wilderness
      Where faith lay down to die;
    Buried beyond all hope was I,
      Hope had no meaning there:
    A yard above my head the sky
      Could only mock at prayer.


    VII

    E'en as I groped along, the gloom
      Suddenly shook at my feet!
    O, strangely as from a rending tomb
      In resurrection, sweet
    Swift wings tumultuously beat
      Away! I paused to hark--
    O, birds of thought, too fair, too fleet
      To follow across the dark!


    VIII

    Yet, like a madman's dream, there came
      One fair swift flash to me
    Of distances, of streets a-flame
      With joy and agony,
    And further yet, a moon-lit sea
      Foaming across its bars,
    And further yet, the infinity
      Of wheeling suns and stars,


    IX

    And further yet ... O, mist of suns
      I grope amidst your light,
    O, further yet, what vast response
      From what transcendent height?
    Wild wings that burst thro' death's dim night
      I can but pause and hark;
    For O, ye are too swift, too white,
      To follow across the dark!


    X

    Mist in the valley, yet I saw,
      And in my soul I knew
    The gleaming City whence I draw
      The strength that then I drew,
    My misty pathway to pursue
      With steady pulse and breath
    Through these dim forest-ways of dew
      And darkness, life and death.




A SONG OF THE PLOUGH


    I

    (_Morning._)

    Idle, comfortless, bare,
      The broad bleak acres lie:
    The ploughman guides the sharp ploughshare
      Steadily nigh.

    The big plough-horses lift
      And climb from the marge of the sea,
    And the clouds of their breath on the clear wind drift
      Over the fallow lea.

    Streaming up with the yoke,
      Brown as the sweet-smelling loam,
    Thro' a sun-swept smother of sweat and smoke
      The two great horses come.

    Up thro' the raw cold morn
      They trample and drag and swing;
    And my dreams are waving with ungrown corn
      In a far-off spring.

    It is my soul lies bare
      Between the hills and the sea:
    Come, ploughman Life, with thy sharp ploughshare,
      And plough the field for me.


    II

    (_Evening._)

    Over the darkening plain
      As the stars regain the sky,
    Steals the chime of an unseen rein
      Steadily nigh.

    Lost in the deepening red
      The sea has forgotten the shore:
    The great dark steeds with their muffled tread
      Draw near once more.

    To the furrow's end they sweep
      Like a sombre wave of the sea,
    Lifting its crest to challenge the deep
      Hush of Eternity.

    Still for a moment they stand,
      Massed on the sun's red death,
    A surge of bronze, too great, too grand,
      To endure for more than a breath.

    Only the billow and stream
      Of muscle and flank and mane
    Like darkling mountain-cataracts gleam
      Gripped in a Titan's rein.

    Once more from the furrow's end
      They wheel to the fallow lea,
    And down the muffled slope descend
      To the sleeping sea.

    And the fibrous knots of clay,
      And the sun-dried clots of earth
    Cleave, and the sunset cloaks the grey
      Waste and the stony dearth!

    O, broad and dusky and sweet,
      The sunset covers the weald;
    But my dreams are waving with golden wheat
      In a still strange field.

    My soul, my soul lies bare,
      Between the hills and the sea;
    Come, ploughman Death, with thy sharp ploughshare,
      And plough the field for me.




THE BANNER


    Who in the gorgeous vanguard of the years
      With wingèd helmet glistens, let him hold
    Ere he pluck down this banner, crying "It bears
      An old device"; for, though it seem the old,

    It is the new! No rent shroud of the past,
      But its transfigured spirit that still shines
      Triumphantly before the foremost lines,
    Even from the first prophesying the last.

    And whoso dreams to pluck it down shall stand
      Bewildered, while the great host thunders by;
    And he shall show the rent shroud in his hand
      And "Lo, I lead the van!" he still shall cry;

    While leagues away, the spirit-banner shines
    Rushing in triumph before the foremost lines.




RANK AND FILE


    I

    Drum-taps! Drum-taps! Who is it marching,
      Marching past in the night? Ah, hark,
        Draw your curtains aside and see
    Endless ranks of the stars o'er-arching
    Endless ranks of an army marching,
      Marching out of the measureless dark,
        Marching away to Eternity.


    II

    See the gleam of the white sad faces
      Moving steadily, row on row,
        Marching away to their hopeless wars:
    Drum-taps, drum-taps, where are they marching?
    Terrible, beautiful, human faces,
      Common as dirt, but softer than snow,
        Coarser than clay, but calm as the stars.


    III

    Is it the last rank readily, steadily
      Swinging away to the unknown doom?
        Ere you can think it, the drum-taps beat
    Louder, and here they come marching, marching,
    Great new level locked ranks of them readily
      Steadily swinging out of the gloom
        Marching endlessly down the street.


    IV

    Unregarded imperial regiments
      White from the roaring intricate places
        Deep in the maw of the world's machine,
    Well content, they are marching, marching,
    Unregarded imperial regiments,
      Ay, and there are those terrible faces
        Great world-heroes that might have been.


    V

    Hints and facets of One--the Eternal,
      Faces of grief, compassion and pain,
        Faces of hunger, faces of stone,
    Faces of love and of labour, marching,
    Changing facets of One--the Eternal,
      Streaming up thro' the wind and the rain,
        All together and each alone.


    VI

    You that doubt of the world's one Passion,
      You for whose science the stars are a-stray,
        Hark--to their orderly thunder-tread!
    These, in the night, with the stars are marching
    One to the end of the world's one Passion!
      You that have taken their Master away,
        Where have you laid Him, living or dead?


    VII

    You whose laws have hidden the One Law,
      You whose searchings obscure the goal,
        You whose systems from chaos begun,
    Chance-born, order-less, hark, they are marching,
    Hearts and tides and stars to the One Law,
      Measured and orderly, rhythmical, whole,
        Multitudinous, welded and one.


    VIII

    Split your threads of the seamless purple,
      Round you marches the world-wide host,
        Round your skies is the marching sky,
    Out in the night there's an army marching,
    Clothed with the night's own seamless purple,
      Making death for the King their boast,
        Marching straight to Eternity.


    IX

    What do you know of the shot-riddled banners
      Royally surging out of the gloom,
        You whose denials their souls despise?
    Out in the night they are marching, marching!
    Treasure your wisdom, and leave them their banners!
      Then--when you follow them down to the tomb
        Pray for one glimpse of the faith in their eyes.


    X

    Pray for one gleam of the white sad faces,
      Moving steadily, row on row,
        Marching away to their hopeless wars,
    Doomed to be trodden like dung, but marching,
    Terrible, beautiful human faces,
      Common as dirt, but softer than snow,
        Coarser than clay, but calm as the stars.


    XI

    What of the end? Will your knowledge escape it?
      What of the end of their dumb dark tears?
        You who mock at their faith and sing,
    Look, for their ragged old banners are marching
    Down to the end--will your knowledge escape it?--
      Down to the end of a few brief years!
        What should they care for the wisdom you bring.


    XII

    Count as they pass, their hundreds, thousands,
      Millions, marching away to a doom
        Younger than London, older that Tyre!
    Drum-taps, drum-taps, where are they marching,
    Regiments, nations, empires, marching?
      Down thro' the jaws of a world-wide tomb,
        Doomed or ever they sprang from the mire!


    XIII

    Doomed to be shovelled like dung to the midden,
      Trodden and kneaded as clay in the road,
        Father and little one, lover and friend,
    Out in the night they are marching, marching,
    Doomed to be shovelled like dung to the midden,
      Bodies that bowed beneath Christ's own load,
        Love that--marched to the self-same end.


    XIV

    What of the end?--O, not of your glory,
      Not of your wealth or your fame that will live
        Half as long as this pellet of dust!--
    Out in the night there's an army marching,
    Nameless, noteless, empty of glory,
      Ready to suffer and die and forgive,
        Marching onward in simple trust,


    XV

    Wearing their poor little toy love-tokens
      Under the march of the terrible skies!
        Is it a jest for a God to play?--
    Whose is the jest of these millions marching,
    Wearing their poor little toy love-tokens,
      Waving their voicelessly grand good-byes,
        Secretly trying, sometimes, to pray.


    XVI

    Dare you dream their trust in Eternity
      Broken, O you to whom prayers are vain,
        You who dream that their God is dead?
    Take your answer--these millions marching
    Out of Eternity, into Eternity,
      These that smiled "We shall meet again,"
        Even as the life from their loved one fled.


    XVII

    This is the answer, not of the sages,
      Not of the loves that are ready to part,
        Ready to find their oblivion sweet!
    Out in the night there's an army marching,
    Men that have toiled thro' the endless ages,
      Men of the pit and the desk and the mart,
        Men that remember, the men in the street,


    XVIII

    These that into the gloom of Eternity
      Stream thro' the dream of this lamp-starred town
        London, an army of clouds to-night!
    These that of old came marching, marching,
    Out of the terrible gloom of Eternity,
      Bowing their heads at Rameses' frown,
        Streaming away thro' Babylon's light;


    XIX

    These that swept at the sound of the trumpet
      Out thro' the night like gonfaloned clouds,
        Exiled hosts when the world was Rome,
    Tossing their tattered old eagles, marching
    Down to sleep till the great last trumpet,
      London, Nineveh, rend your shrouds,
        Rally the legions and lead them home,


    XX

    Lead them home with their glorious faces
      Moving steadily, row on row
        Marching up from the end of wars,
    Out of the Valley of Shadows, marching,
    Terrible, beautiful, human faces,
      Common as dirt, but softer than snow,
        Coarser than clay, but calm as the stars,


    XXI

    Marching out of the endless ages,
      Marching out of the dawn of time,
        Endless columns of unknown men,
    Endless ranks of the stars o'er-arching
    Endless ranks of an army marching
    Numberless out of the numberless ages,
      Men out of every race and clime,
        Marching steadily, now as then.




THE SKY-LARK CAGED


    I

    Beat, little breast, against the wires.
      Strive, little wings and misted eyes
    Which one wild gleam of memory fires
      Beseeching still the unfettered skies,
    Whither at dewy dawn you sprang
    Quivering with joy from this dark earth and sang.


    II

    And still you sing--your narrow cage
      Shall set at least your music free!
    Its rapturous wings in glorious rage
      Mount and are lost in liberty,
    While those who caged you creep on earth
    Blind prisoners from the hour that gave them birth.


    III

    Sing! The great City surges round.
      Blinded with light, thou canst not know.
    Dream! 'Tis the fir-woods' windy sound
      Rolling a psalm of praise below.
    Sing, o'er the bitter dust and shame,
    And touch us with thine own transcendent flame.


    IV

    Sing, o'er the City dust and slime;
      Sing, o'er the squalor and the gold,
    The greed that darkens earth with crime,
      The spirits that are bought and sold.
    O, shower the healing notes like rain,
    And lift us to the height of grief again.


    V

    Sing! The same music swells your breast,
      And the wild notes are still as sweet
    As when above the fragrant nest
      And the wide billowing fields of wheat
    You soared and sang the livelong day,
    And in the light of heaven dissolved away.


    VI

    The light of heaven! Is it not here?
      One rapture, one ecstatic joy,
    One passion, one sublime despair,
      One grief which nothing can destroy,
    You--though your dying eyes are wet
    Remember, 'tis our blunted hearts forget.


    VII

    Beat, little breast, still beat, still beat,
      Strive, misted eyes and tremulous wings;
    Swell, little throat, your _Sweet! Sweet! Sweet!_
      Thro' which such deathless memory rings:
    Better to break your heart and die,
    Than, like your gaolers, to forget your sky.




THE LOVERS' FLIGHT


    I

    Come, the dusk is lit with flowers!
      Quietly take this guiding hand:
    Little breath to waste is ours
      On the road to lovers' land.
    Time is in his dungeon-keep!
      Ah, not thither, lest he hear,
    Starting from his old grey sleep,
      Rosy feet upon the stair.


    II

    Ah, not thither, lest he heed
      Ere we reach the rusty door!
    Nay, the stairways only lead
      Back to his dark world once more:
    There's a merrier way we know
      Leading to a lovelier night--
    See, your casement all a-glow
      Diamonding the wonder-light.


    III

    Fling the flowery lattice wide,
      Let the silken ladder down,
    Swiftly to the garden glide
      Glimmering in your long white gown,
    Rosy from your pillow, sweet,
      Come, unsandalled and divine;
    Let the blossoms stain your feet
      And the stars behold them shine.


    IV

    Swift, our pawing palfreys wait,
      And the page--Dan Cupid--frets,
    Holding at the garden gate
      Reins that chime like castanets,
    Bits a-foam with fairy flakes
      Flung from seas whence Venus rose:
    Come, for Father Time awakes
      And the star of morning glows.


    V

    Swift--one satin foot shall sway
      Half a heart-beat in my hand,
    Swing to stirrup and swift away
      Down the road to lovers' land:
    Ride--the moon is dusky gold,
      Ride--our hearts are young and warm,
    Ride--the hour is growing old,
      And the next may break the charm.


    VI

    Swift, ere we that thought the song
      Full--for others--of the truth,
    We that smiled, contented, strong,
      Dowered with endless wealth of youth,
    Find that like a summer cloud
      Youth indeed has crept away,
    Find the robe a clinging shroud
      And the hair be-sprent with grey.


    VII

    Ride--we'll leave it all behind,
      All the turmoil and the tears,
    All the mad vindictive blind
      Yelping of the heartless years!
    Ride--the ringing world's in chase,
      Yet we've slipped old Father Time,
    By the love-light in your face
      And the jingle of this rhyme.


    VIII

    Ride--for still the hunt is loud!
      Ride--our steeds can hold their own!
    Yours, a satin sea-wave, proud,
      Queen, to be your living throne,
    Glittering with the foam and fire
      Churned from seas whence Venus rose,
    Tow'rds the gates of our desire
      Gloriously burning flows.


    IX

    He, with streaming flanks a-smoke,
      Needs no spur of blood-stained steel:
    Only that soft thudding stroke
      Once, o' the little satin heel,
    Drives his mighty heart, your slave,
      Bridled with these bells of rhyme,
    Onward, like a crested wave
      Thundering out of hail of Time.


    X

    On, till from a rosy spark
      Fairy-small as gleams your hand,
    Broadening as we cleave the dark,
      Dawn the gates of lovers' land,
    Nearing, sweet, till breast and brow
      Lifted through the purple night
    Catch the deepening glory now
      And your eyes the wonder-light.


    XI

    E'en as tow'rd your face I lean
      Swooping nigh the gates of bliss,
    I the king and you the queen
      Crown each other with a kiss.
    Riding, soaring like a song
      Burn we tow'rds the heaven above,
    You the sweet and I the strong
      And in both the fire of love.


    XII

    Ride--though now the distant chase
      Knows that we have slipped old Time,
    Lift the love-light of your face,
      Shake the bridle of this rhyme,
    See, the flowers of night and day
      Streaming past on either hand,
    Ride into the eternal May,
      Ride into the lovers' land.




THE ROCK POOL


    I

    Bright as a fallen fragment of the sky,
      Mid shell-encrusted rocks the sea-pool shone,
    Glassing the sunset-clouds in its clear heart,
    A small enchanted world enwalled apart
            In diamond mystery,
    Content with its own dreams, its own strict zone
      Of urchin woods, its fairy bights and bars,
      Its daisy-disked anemones and rose-feathered stars.


    II

    Forsaken for awhile by that deep roar
      Which works in storm and calm the eternal will,
    Drags down the cliffs, bids the great hills go by
    And shepherds their multitudinous pageantry,--
            Here, on this ebb-tide shore
    A jewelled bath of beauty, sparkling still,
      The little sea-pool smiled away the sea,
      And slept on its own plane of bright tranquillity.


    III

    A self-sufficing soul, a pool in trance,
      Un-stirred by all the spirit-winds that blow
    From o'er the gulfs of change, content, ere yet
    On its own crags, which rough peaked limpets fret
            The last rich colours glance,
    Content to mirror the sea-bird's wings of snow,
      Or feel in some small creek, ere sunset fails,
      A tiny Nautilus hoist its lovely purple sails;


    IV

    And, furrowing into pearl that rosy bar,
      Sail its own soul from fairy fringe to fringe,
    Lured by the twinkling prey 'twas born to reach
    In its own pool, by many an elfin beach
            Of jewels, adventuring far
    Through the last mirrored cloud and sunset-tinge
      And past the rainbow-dripping cave where lies
      The dark green pirate-crab at watch with beaded eyes,


    V

    Or fringed Medusa floats like light in light,
      Medusa, with the loveliest of all fays
    Pent in its irised bubble of jellied sheen,
    Trailing long ferns of moonlight, shot with green
            And crimson rays and white,
    Waving ethereal tendrils, ghostly sprays,
      Daring the deep, dissolving in the sun,
      The vanishing point of life, the light whence life begun.


    VI

    Poised between me, light, time, eternity,
      So tinged with all, that in its delicate brain
    Kindling it as a lamp with her bright wings
    Day-long, night-long, young Ariel sits and sings
            Echoing the lucid sea,
    Listening it echo her own unearthly strain,
      Watching through lucid walls the world's rich tide,
      One light, one substance with her own, rise and subside.


    VII

    And over soft brown woods, limpid, serene,
      Puffing its fans the Nautilus went its way,
    And from a hundred salt and weedy shelves
    Peered little hornèd faces of sea-elves:
            The prawn darted, half-seen,
    Thro' watery sunlight, like a pale green ray,
      And all around, from soft green waving bowers,
      Creatures like fruit out-crept from fluted shells like flowers.


    VIII

    And, over all, that glowing mirror spread
      The splendour of its heaven-reflecting gleams,
    A level wealth of tints, calm as the sky
    That broods above our own mortality:
            The temporal seas had fled,
    And ah, what hopes, what fears, what mystic dreams
      Could ruffle it now from any deeper deep?
      Content in its own bounds it slept a changeless sleep.


    IX

    Suddenly, from that heaven beyond belief,
      Suddenly, from that world beyond its ken,
    Dashing great billows o'er its rosy bars,
    Shivering its dreams into a thousand stars,
            Flooding each sun-dried reef
    With waves of colour, (as once, for mortal men
      Bethesda's angel) with blue eyes, wide and wild,
      Naked into the pool there stepped a little child.


    X

    Her red-gold hair against the far green sea
      Blew thickly out: her slender golden form
    Shone dark against the richly waning West
    As with one hand she splashed her glistening breast,
            Then waded up to her knee
    And frothed the whole pool into a fairy storm!...
      So, stooping through our skies, of old, there came
      Angels that once could set this world's dark pool a-flame,


    XI

    From which the seas of faith have ebbed away,
      Leaving the lonely shore too bright, too bare,
    While mirrored softly in the smooth wet sand
    A deeper sunset sees its blooms expand
            But all too phantom-fair,
    Between the dark brown rocks and sparkling spray
      Where the low ripples pleaded, shrank and sighed,
      And tossed a moment's rainbow heavenward ere they died.


    XII

    Stoop, starry souls, incline to this dark coast,
      Where all too long, too faithlessly, we dream.
    Stoop to the world's dark pool, its crags and scars,
    Its yellow sands, its rosy harbour-bars,
            And soft green wastes that gleam
    But with some glorious drifting god-like ghost
      Of cloud, some vaguely passionate crimson stain:
      Rend the blue waves of heaven, shatter our sleep again!




THE ISLAND HAWK

(A SONG FOR THE FIRST LAUNCHING OF HIS MAJESTY'S AERIAL NAVY)


    I

    _Chorus_--
        _Ships have swept with my conquering name
          Over the waves of war,
        Swept thro' the Spaniards' thunder and flame
          To the splendour of Trafalgar:
        On the blistered decks of their great renown,
          In the wind of my storm-beat wings,
        Hawkins and Hawke went sailing down
          To the harbour of deep-sea kings!
             By the storm-beat wings of the hawk, the hawk,
               Bent beak and pitiless breast,
             They clove their way thro' the red sea-fray:
               Who wakens me now to the quest?_


    II

    Hushed are the whimpering winds on the hill,
      Dumb is the shrinking plain,
    And the songs that enchanted the woods are still
      As I shoot to the skies again!
    Does the blood grow black on my fierce bent beak,
      Does the down still cling to my claw?
    Who brightened these eyes for the prey they seek?
      Life, I follow thy law!
          _For I am the hawk, the hawk, the hawk!
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the wild wind's way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    III

    As I glide and glide with my peering head,
      Or swerve at a puff of smoke,
    Who watcheth my wings on the wind outspread,
      Here--gone--with an instant stroke?
    Who toucheth the glory of life I feel
      As I buffet this great glad gale,
    Spire and spire to the cloud-world, wheel,
      Loosen my wings and sail?
          _For I am the hawk, the island hawk,
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the sun's bright way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    IV

    Had they given me "Cloud-cuckoo-city" to guard
      Between mankind and the sky,
    Tho' the dew might shine on an April sward,
      Iris had ne'er passed by!
    Swift as her beautiful wings might be
      From the rosy Olympian hill,
    Had Epops entrusted the gates to me
      Earth were his kingdom still.
          _For I am the hawk, the archer, the hawk!
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the wild wind's way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    V

    My mate in the nest on the high bright tree
      Blazing with dawn and dew,
    She knoweth the gleam of the world and the glee
      As I drop like a bolt from the blue;
    She knoweth the fire of the level flight
      As I skim, close, close to the ground,
    With the long grass lashing my breast and the bright
      Dew-drops flashing around.
          _She watcheth the hawk, the hawk, the hawk,
            (O, the red-blotched eggs in the nest!)
          Watcheth him sway in the sun's bright way;
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    VI

    She builded her nest on the high bright wold,
      She was taught in a world afar,
    The lore that is only an April old
      Yet old as the evening star;
    Life of a far off ancient day
      In an hour unhooded her eyes;
    In the time of the budding of one green spray
      She was wise as the stars are wise.
          _Brown flower of the tree of the hawk, the hawk,
            On the old elm's burgeoning breast,
          She watcheth me sway in the wild wind's way;
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    VII

    Spirit and sap of the sweet swift Spring,
      Fire of our island soul,
    Burn in her breast and pulse in her wing
      While the endless ages roll;
    Avatar--she--of the perilous pride
      That plundered the golden West,
    Her glance is a sword, but it sweeps too wide
      For a rumour to trouble her rest.
          _She goeth her glorious way, the hawk,
            She nurseth her brood alone;
          She will not swoop for an owlet's whoop,
            She hath calls and cries of her own._


    VIII

    There was never a dale in our isle so deep
      That her wide wings were not free
    To soar to the sovran heights and keep
      Sight of the rolling sea:
    Is it there, is it here in the rolling skies,
      The realm of her future fame?
    Look once, look once in her glittering eyes,
      Ye shall find her the same, the same.
           _Up to the sides with the hawk, the hawk,
               As it was in the days of old!
           Ye shall sail once more, ye shall soar, ye shall soar
             To the new-found realms of gold._


    IX

    She hath ridden on white Arabian steeds
      Thro' the ringing English dells,
    For the joy of a great queen, hunting in state,
      To the music of golden bells;
    A queen's fair fingers have drawn the hood
      And tossed her aloft in the blue,
    A white hand eager for needless blood;
      I hunt for the needs of two.
          _Yet I am the hawk, the hawk, the hawk!
            Who knoweth my pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth me sway in the sun's bright way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    X

    Who fashioned her wide and splendid eyes
      That have stared in the eyes of kings?
    With a silken twist she was looped to their wrist:
      She has clawed at their jewelled rings!
    Who flung her first thro' the crimson dawn
      To pluck him a prey from the skies,
    When the love-light shone upon lake and lawn
      In the valleys of Paradise?
          _Who fashioned the hawk, the hawk, the hawk,
            Bent beak and pitiless breast?
          Who watcheth him sway in the wild wind's way?
                Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    XI

    Is there ever a song in all the world
      Shall say how the quest began
    With the beak and the wings that have made us kings
      And cruel--almost--as man?
    The wild wind whimpers across the heath
      Where the sad little tufts of blue
    And the red-stained grey little feathers of death
      Flutter! _Who fashioned us? Who?
          Who fashioned the scimitar wings of the hawk,
            Bent beak and arrowy breast?
          Who watcheth him sway in the sun's bright way?
            Flee--flee--for I quest, I quest._


    XII

    Linnet and woodpecker, red-cap and jay,
      Shriek that a doom shall fall
    One day, one day, on my pitiless way
      From the sky that is over us all;
    But the great blue hawk of the heavens above
      Fashioned the world for his prey,--
    King and queen and hawk and dove,
      We shall meet in his clutch that day;
          _Shall I not welcome him, I, the hawk?
            Yea, cry, as they shrink from his claw,
          Cry, as I die, to the unknown sky,
            Life, I follow thy law!_


    XIII

    _Chorus--_
         _Ships have swept with my conquering name ..._
           Over the world and beyond,
         Hark! Bellerophon, Marlborough, Thunderer,
           Condor, respond!--
         _On the blistered decks of their dread renown,
           In the rush of my storm-beat wings,
         Hawkins and Hawke went sailing down
           To the glory of deep-sea kings!
               By the storm-beat wings of the hawk, the hawk,
                 Bent beak and pitiless breast,
               They clove their way thro' the red sea-fray!
                 Who wakens me now to the quest._




THE ADMIRAL'S GHOST


    I tell you a tale to-night
      Which a seaman told to me,
    With eyes that gleamed in the lanthorn light
      And a voice as low as the sea.

    You could almost hear the stars
      Twinkling up in the sky,
    And the old wind woke and moaned in the spars,
      And the same old waves went by,

    Singing the same old song
      As ages and ages ago,
    While he froze my blood in that deep-sea night
      With the things that he seemed to know.

    A bare foot pattered on deck;
      Ropes creaked; then--all grew still,
    And he pointed his finger straight in my face
      And growled, as a sea-dog will.

    "Do' ee know who Nelson was?
      That pore little shrivelled form
    With the patch on his eye and the pinned-up sleeve
      And a soul like a North Sea storm?

    "Ask of the Devonshire men!
      They know, and they'll tell you true;
    He wasn't the pore little chawed-up chap
      That Hardy thought he knew.

    "He wasn't the man you think!
      His patch was a dern disguise!
    For he knew that they'd find him out, d'you see,
      If they looked him in both his eyes.

    "He was twice as big as he seemed;
      But his clothes were cunningly made.
    He'd both of his hairy arms all right!
      The sleeve was a trick of the trade.

    "You've heard of sperrits, no doubt;
      Well, there's more in the matter than that!
    But he wasn't the patch and he wasn't the sleeve,
      And he wasn't the laced cocked-hat.

    "_Nelson was just--a Ghost!_
      You may laugh! But the Devonshire men
    They knew that he'd come when England called,
      And they know that he'll come again.

    "I'll tell you the way it was
      (For none of the landsmen know),
    And to tell it you right, you must go a-starn
      Two hundred years or so.

       *   *   *   *

    "The waves were lapping and slapping
      The same as they are to-day;
    And Drake lay dying aboard his ship
      In Nombre Dios Bay.

    "The scent of the foreign flowers
      Came floating all around;
    'But I'd give my soul for the smell o' the pitch,'
      Says he, 'in Plymouth Sound.'

    "'What shall I do,' he says,
      'When the guns begin to roar,
    An' England wants me, and me not there
      To shatter 'er foes once more?'

    "(You've heard what he said, maybe,
      But I'll mark you the p'ints again;
    For I want you to box your compass right
      And get my story plain.)

    "'You must take my drum,' he says,
      'To the old sea-wall at home;
    And if ever you strike that drum,' he says,
      'Why, strike me blind, I'll come!

    "'If England needs me, dead
    Or living, I'll rise that day!
    I'll rise from the darkness under the sea
      Ten thousand miles away.'

    "That's what he said; and he died,
      An' his pirates, listenin' roun',
    With their crimson doublets and jewelled swords
      That flashed as the sun went down,

    "They sewed him up in his shroud
      With a round-shot top and toe,
    To sink him under the salt sharp sea
      Where all good seamen go.

    "They lowered him down in the deep,
      And there in the sunset light
    They boomed a broadside over his grave,
      As meanin' to say 'Good-night.'

    "They sailed away in the dark
      To the dear little isle they knew;
    And they hung his drum by the old sea-wall
      The same as he told them to.

       *   *   *   *

    "Two hundred years went by,
      And the guns began to roar,
    And England was fighting hard for her life,
      As ever she fought of yore.

    "'It's only my dead that count,'
      She said, as she says to-day;
    'It isn't the ships and it isn't the guns
      'Ull sweep Trafalgar's Bay.'

    "D'you guess who Nelson was?
      You may laugh, but it's true as true!
    There was more in that pore little chawed-up chap
      Than ever his best friend knew.

    "The foe was creepin' close,
      In the dark, to our white-cliffed isle;
    They were ready to leap at England's throat,
      When--O, you may smile, you may smile;

    "But--ask of the Devonshire men;
      For they heard in the dead of night
    The roll of a drum, and they saw _him_ pass
      On a ship all shining white.

    "He stretched out his dead cold face
      And he sailed in the grand old way!
    The fishes had taken an eye and his arm,
      But he swept Trafalgar's Bay.

    "Nelson--was Francis Drake!
      O, what matters the uniform,
    Or the patch on your eye or your pinned-up sleeve,
      If your soul's like a North Sea storm?"




EDINBURGH


    I

    City of mist and rain and blown grey spaces,
      Dashed with wild wet colour and gleam of tears,
    Dreaming in Holyrood halls of the passionate faces
      Lifted to one Queen's face that has conquered the years,
    Are not the halls of thy memory haunted places?
      Cometh there not as a moon (where the blood-rust sears
    Floors a-flutter of old with silks and laces),
      Gliding, a ghostly Queen, thro' a mist of tears?


    II

    Proudly here, with a loftier pinnacled splendour,
      Throned in his northern Athens, what spells remain
    Still on the marble lips of the Wizard, and render
      Silent the gazer on glory without a stain!
    Here and here, do we whisper, with hearts more tender,
      Tusitala wandered thro' mist and rain;
    Rainbow-eyed and frail and gallant and slender,
      Dreaming of pirate-isles in a jewelled main.


    III

    Up the Canongate climbeth, cleft asunder
      Raggedly here, with a glimpse of the distant sea
    Flashed through a crumbling alley, a glimpse of wonder,
      Nay, for the City is throned on Eternity!
    Hark! from the soaring castle a cannon's thunder
      Closeth an hour for the world and an æon for me,
    Gazing at last from the martial heights whereunder
      Deathless memories roll to an ageless sea.




IN A RAILWAY CARRIAGE


    Three long isles of sunset-cloud,
      Poised in an ocean of gold,
    Floated away in the west
      As the long train southward rolled;

    And through the gleam and shade of the panes,
      While meadow and wood went by,
    Across the streaming earth
      We watched the steadfast sky.

    Dark before the westward window,
      Heavy and bloated, rolled
    The face of a drunken woman
      Nodding against the gold;

    Dark before the infinite glory,
      With bleared and leering eyes,
    It stupidly lurched and nodded
      Against the tender skies.

    _What had ye done to her, masters of men,
      That her head be bowed down thus--
    Thus for your golden vespers,
      And deepening angelus?_

    Dark, besotted, malignant, vacant,
      Slobbering, wrinkled, old,
    Weary and wickedly smiling,
      She nodded against the gold.

    Pitiful, loathsome, maudlin, lonely,
      Her moist, inhuman eyes
    Blinked at the flies on the window,
      And could not see the skies.

    As a beast that turns and returns to a mirror
      And will not see its face,
    Her eyes rejected the sunset,
      Her soul lay dead in its place,

    Dead in the furrows and folds of her flesh
      As a corpse lies lapped in the shroud;
    Silently floated beside her
      The isles of sunset-cloud.

    _What had ye done to her, years upon years,
      That her head should be bowed down thus--
    Thus for your golden vespers,
      And deepening angelus?_

    Her nails were blackened and split with labour,
      Her back was heavily bowed;
    Silently floated beside her
      The isles of sunset-cloud.

    Over their tapering streaks of lilac,
      In breathless depths afar,
    Bright as the tear of an angel
      Glittered a lonely star.

    While the hills and the streams of the world went past us,
      And the long train roared and rolled
    Southward, and dusk was falling,
      She nodded against the gold.




AN EAST-END COFFEE-STALL


    Down the dark alley a ring of orange light
      Glows. God, what leprous tatters of distress,
      Droppings of misery, rags of Thy loneliness
    Quiver and heave like vermin, out of the night!

    Like crippled rats, creeping out of the gloom,
      O Life, for one of thy terrible moments there,
      Lit by the little flickering yellow flare,
    Faces that mock at life and death and doom,

    Faces that long, long since have known the worst,
      Faces of women that have seen the child
      Waste in their arms, and strangely, terribly, smiled
    When the dark nipple of death has eased its thirst;

    Faces of men that once, though long ago,
      Saw the faint light of hope, though far away,--
      Hope that, at end of some tremendous day,
    They yet might reach some life where tears could flow;

    Faces of our humanity, ravaged, white,
      Wrenched with old love, old hate, older despair,
      Steal out of vile filth-dropping dens to stare
    On that wild monstrance of a naphtha light.

    They crowd before the stall's bright altar rail,
      Grotesque, and sacred, for that light's brief span,
      And all the shuddering darkness cries, "All hail,
    Daughters and Sons of Man!"

    See, see, once more, though all their souls be dead,
      They hold it up, triumphantly hold it up,
      They feel, they warm their hands upon the Cup;
    Their crapulous hands, their claw-like hands break Bread!

    See, with lean faces rapturously a-glow
      For a brief while they dream and munch and drink;
      Then, one by one, once more, silently slink
    Back, back into the gulfing mist. They go,

    One by one, out of the ring of light!
      They creep, like crippled rats, into the gloom,
      Into the fogs of life and death and doom,
    Into the night, the immeasurable night.




RED OF THE DAWN


    I

    The Dawn peered in with blood-shot eyes
      Pressed close against the cracked old pane.
      The garret slept: the slow sad rain
    Had ceased: grey fogs obscured the skies;
    But Dawn peered in with haggard eyes.


    II

    All as last night? The three-legged chair,
      The bare walls and the tattered bed,
      All!--but for those wild flakes of red
    (And Dawn, perhaps, had splashed them there!)
    Round the bare walls, the bed, the chair.


    III

    'Twas here, last night, when winds were loud,
      A ragged singing-girl, she came
      Out of the tavern's glare and shame,
    With some few pence--for she was proud--
    Came home to sleep, when winds were loud.


    IV

    And she sleeps well; for she was tired!
      That huddled shape beneath the sheet
      With knees up-drawn, no wind or sleet
    Can wake her now! Sleep she desired;
    And she sleeps well, for she was tired.


    V

    And there was one that followed her
      With some unhappy curse called "love":
      Last night, though winds beat loud above,
    She shrank! Hark, on the creaking stair,
    What stealthy footstep followed her?


    VI

    But now the Curse, it seemed, had gone!
      The small tin-box, wherein she hid
      Old childish treasures, had burst its lid.
    Dawn kissed her doll's cracked face. It shone
    Red-smeared, but laughing--_the Curse is gone_.


    VII

    So she sleeps well: she does not move;
      And on the wall, the chair, the bed,
      Is it the Dawn that splashes red,
    High as the text where _God is Love_
    Hangs o'er her head? She does not move.


    VIII

    The clock dictates its old refrain:
      All else is quiet; or, far away,
      Shaking the world with new-born day,
    There thunders past some mighty train:
    The clock dictates its old refrain.


    IX

    The Dawn peers in with blood-shot eyes:
      The crust, the broken cup are there!
      She does not rise yet to prepare
    Her scanty meal. God does not rise
      And pluck the blood-stained sheet from her;
    But Dawn peers in with haggard eyes.




THE DREAM-CHILD'S INVITATION


    I

    _Once upon a time!_--Ah, now the light is burning dimly.
      Peterkin is here again: he wants another tale!
    Don't you hear him whispering--_The wind is in the chimley,
      The ottoman's a treasure-ship, we'll all set sail?_


    II

    All set sail? No, the wind is very loud to-night:
      The darkness on the waters is much deeper than of yore.
    Yet I wonder--hark, he whispers--if the little streets are still as bright
      In old Japan, in old Japan, that happy haunted shore.


    III

    I wonder--hush, he whispers--if perhaps the world will wake again
      When Christmas brings the stories back from where the skies are blue,
    Where clouds are scattering diamonds down on every cottage window-pane,
      And every boy's a fairy prince, and every tale is true.


    IV

    There the sword Excalibur is thrust into the dragon's throat,
      Evil there is evil, black is black, and white is white:
    There the child triumphant hurls the villain spluttering into the moat;
      There the captured princess only waits the peerless knight.


    V

    Fairyland is gleaming there beyond the Sherwood Forest trees,
      There the City of the Clouds has anchored on the plain
    All her misty vistas and slumber-rosy palaces
      (_Shall we not, ah, shall we not, wander there again?_)


    VI

    "Happy ever after" there, the lights of home a welcome fling
      Softly thro' the darkness as the star that shone of old,
    Softly over Bethlehem and o'er the little cradled King
      Whom the sages worshipped with their frankincense and gold.


    VII

    _Once upon a time_--perhaps a hundred thousand years ago--
      Whisper to me, Peterkin, I have forgotten when!
    Once upon a time there was a way, a way we used to know
      For stealing off at twilight from the weary ways of men.


    VIII

    Whisper it, O whisper it--the way, the way is all I need!
      All the heart and will are here and all the deep desire!
    _Once upon a time_--ah, now the light is drawing near indeed,
      I see the fairy faces flush to roses round the fire.


    IX

    _Once upon a time_--the little lips are on my cheek again,
      Little fairy fingers clasped and clinging draw me nigh,
    Dreams, no more than dreams, but they unloose the weary prisoner's chain
      And lead him from his dungeon! "What's a thousand years?" they cry.


    X

    A thousand years, a thousand years, a little drifting dream ago,
      All of us were hunting with a band of merry men,
    The skies were blue, the boughs were green, the clouds were crisping
        isles of snow ...
      ... So Robin blew his bugle, and the Now became the Then.




THE TRAMP TRANSFIGURED

(AN EPISODE IN THE LIFE OF A CORN-FLOWER MILLIONAIRE)


    I

    All the way to Fairyland across the thyme and heather,
      Round a little bank of fern that rustled on the sky,
    Me and stick and bundle, sir, we jogged along together,--
      (Changeable the weather? Well--it ain't all pie!)
    Just about the sunset--Won't you listen to my story?--
      Look at me! I'm only rags and tatters to your eye!
    Sir, that blooming sunset crowned this battered hat with glory!
      Me that was a crawling worm became a butterfly--
                    (Ain't it hot and dry?
      Thank you, sir, thank you, sir!) a blooming butterfly.


    II

    Well, it happened this way! I was lying loose and lazy,
      Just as, of a Sunday, you yourself might think no shame,
    Puffing little clouds of smoke, and picking at a daisy,
      Dreaming of your dinner, p'raps, or wishful for the same:
    Suddenly, around that ferny bank there slowly waddled--
      Slowly as the finger of a clock her shadow came--
    Slowly as a tortoise down that winding path she toddled,
      Leaning on a crookèd staff, a poor old crookèd dame,
                    Limping, but not lame,
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, a poor old crookèd dame.


    III

    Slowly did I say, sir? Well, you've heard that funny fable
      Consekint the tortoise and the race it give an 'are?
    This was curiouser than that! At first I wasn't able
      Quite to size the memory up that bristled thro' my hair:
    Suddenly, I'd got it, with a nasty shivery feeling,
      While she walked and walked and yet was not a bit more near,--
    Sir, it was the tread-mill earth beneath her feet a-wheeling
      Faster than her feet could trot to heaven or anywhere,
                    Earth's revolvin' stair
      Wheeling, while my wayside clump was kind of anchored there.


    IV

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, and just a little nearer,
      Inch and 'arf an inch she went, but never gained a yard:
    Quiet as a fox I lay; I didn't wish to scare 'er,
      Watching thro' the ferns, and thinking "What a rum old card!"
    Both her wrinkled tortoise eyes with yellow resin oozing,
      Both her poor old bony hands were red and seamed and scarred!
    Lord, I felt as if myself was in a public boozing,
      While my own old woman went about and scrubbed and charred!
                    Lord, it seemed so hard!
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, she never gained a yard.


    V

    Yus, and there in front of her--I hadn't seen it rightly--
      Lurked that little finger-post to point another road,
    Just a tiny path of poppies twisting infi-nite-ly
      Through the whispering seas of wheat, a scarlet thread that showed
    White with ox-eye daisies here and there and chalky cobbles,
      Blue with waving corn-flowers: far and far away it glowed,
    Winding into heaven, I thinks; but, Lord, the way she hobbles,
      Lord, she'll never reach it, for she bears too great a load;
                    Yus, and then I knowed,
    If she did, she couldn't, for the board was marked _No Road_.


    VI

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, I couldn't wait no longer!
      Up I gets and bows polite and pleasant as a toff--
    "Arternoon," I says, "I'm glad your boots are going stronger;
      Only thing I'm dreading is your feet 'ull both come off."
    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, she didn't stop to answer,
      "Arternoon," she says, and sort o' chokes a little cough,
    "I must get to Piddinghoe to-morrow if I can, sir!"
      "Demme, my good woman! Haw! Don't think I mean to loff,"
                    Says I, like a toff,
      "Where d'you mean to sleep to-night? God made this grass for go'ff."


    VII

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, and smilingly she eyed me
      (Dreadful the low cunning of these creechars, don't you think?)
    "That's all right! The weather's bright. Them bushes there 'ull hide me.
      Don't the gorse smell nice?" I felt my derned old eyelids blink!
    "Supper? I've a crust of bread, a big one, and a bottle,"
      (Just as I expected! Ah, these creechars always drink!)
    "Sugar and water and half a pinch of tea to rinse my throttle,
      Then I'll curl up cosy!"--"If you're cotched it means the clink!"
                      --"Yus, but don't you think
      If a star should see me, God 'ull tell that star to wink?"


    VIII

    "Now, look here," I says, "I don't know what your blooming age is!"
      "Three-score years and five," she says, "that's five more years to go
    _Tick, tack, tick tack_, before I gets my wages!"
      "Wages all be damned," I says, "there's one thing that I know--
    Gals that stay out late o' nights are sure to meet wi' sorrow.
      Speaking as a toff," I says, "it isn't _comme il faut_!
    Tell me why you want to get to Piddinghoe to-morrow."--
      "That was where my son worked, twenty years ago!"--
                    "Twenty years ago?
      Never wrote? May still be there? Remember you?... Just so!"


    IX

    Yus, it was a drama; but she weren't my long-lost parent!
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, she trotted all the while,
    Never getting forrarder, and not the least aware on't,
      Though I stood beside her with a sort of silly smile
    Stock-still! _Tick, tack_! This blooming world's a bubble:
      There I stood and stared at it, mile on flowery mile,
    Chasing o' the sunset,--"Gals are sure to meet wi' trouble
      Staying out o' nights," I says, once more, and tries to smile,
                      "Come, that ain't your style,
      Here's a shilling, mother, for to-day I've made my pile!"


    X

    Yus, a dozen coppers, all my capital, it fled, sir,
      Representin' twelve bokays that cost me nothink each,
    Twelve bokays o' corn-flowers blue that grew beside my bed, sir,
      That same day, at sunrise, when the sky was like a peach:
    Easy as a poet's dreams they blossomed round my head, sir,
      All I had to do was just to lift my hand and reach:
    So, upon the roaring waves I cast my blooming bread, sir,
      Bread I'd earned with nose-gays on the bare-foot Brighton beach,
                    Nose-gays _and_ a speech,
      All about the bright blue eyes they matched on Brighton beach.


    XI

    Still, you've only got to hear the bankers on the budget,
      Then you'll know the giving game is hardly "high finance";
    Which no more it wasn't for that poor old dame to trudge it,
      _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, on such a devil's dance:
    Crumbs, it took me quite aback to see her stop so humble,
      Casting up into my face a sort of shiny glance,
    _Bless you, bless you_, that was what I thought I heard her mumble;
      Lord, a prayer for poor old Bill, a rummy sort of chance!
                      Crumbs, that shiny glance
      Kinder made me king of all the sky from here to France.


    XII

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, but now she toddled faster:
      Soon she'd reach the little twisted by-way through the wheat.
    "Look 'ee here," I says, "young woman, don't you court disaster!
      Peepin' through yon poppies there's a cottage trim and neat
    White as chalk and sweet as turf: wot price a bed for sorrow,
      Sprigs of lavender between the pillow and the sheet?"
    "No," she says, "I've got to get to Piddinghoe to-morrow!
      P'raps they'd tell the work'us! And I've lashings here to eat:
                      Don't the gorse smell sweet?"...
      Well, I turned and left her plodding on beside the wheat.


    XIII

    Every cent I'd given her like a hero in a story;
      Yet, alone with leagues of wheat I seemed to grow aware
    Solomon himself, arrayed in all his golden glory,
      Couldn't vie with Me, the corn-flower king, the millionaire!
    How to cash those bright blue cheques that night? My trouser pockets
      Jingled sudden! Six more pennies, crept from James knew where!
    Crumbs! I hurried back with eyes just bulging from their sockets,
      Pushed 'em in the old dame's fist and listened for the prayer,
                      Shamming not to care,
      Bill--the blarsted chicken-thief, the corn-flower millionaire.


    XIV

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, and faster yet she clattered!
      Ay, she'd almost gained a yard! I left her once again.
    Feeling very warm inside and sort of 'ighly flattered,
      On I plodded, all alone, with hay-stacks in my brain.
    Suddenly, with _chink--chink--chink_, the old sweet jingle
      Startled me! 'TWAS THRUPPENCE MORE! Three coppers round and plain!
    Lord, temptation struck me and I felt my gullet tingle.
      Then--I hurried back, beside them seas of golden grain:
                  No, I can't explain;
      There I thrust 'em in her fist, and left her once again.


    XV

    Tinkle-chink! THREE HA'PENCE! If the vulgar fractions followed,
      Big fleas have little fleas! It flashed upon me there,--
    Like the snakes of Pharaoh which the snakes of Moses swallowed
      All the world was playing at the tortoise and the hare:
    Half the smallest atom is--my soul was getting tipsy--
      Heaven is one big circle and the centre's everywhere,
    Yus, and that old woman was an angel and a gipsy,
      Yus, and Bill, the chicken-thief, the corn-flower millionaire,
                    Shamming not to care,
      What was he? A seraph on the misty rainbow-stair!


    XVI

    Don't you make no doubt of it! The deeper that you look, sir,
      All your ancient poets tell you just the same as me,--
    What about old Ovid and his most indecent book, sir,
      Morphosizing females into flower and star and tree?
    What about old Proteus and his 'ighly curious 'abits,
      Mixing of his old grey beard into the old grey sea?
    What about old Darwin and the hat that brought forth rabbits,
      Mud and slime that growed into the pomp of Ninevey?
                  What if there should be
      One great Power beneath it all, one God in you and me?


    XVII

    Anyway, it seemed to me I'd struck the world's pump-handle!
      "Back with that three ha'pence, Bill," I mutters, "or you're lost."
    Back I hurries thro' the dusk where, shining like a candle,
      Pale before the sunset stood that fairy finger-post.
      _Sir, she wasn't there!_ I'd struck the place where all roads crost,
    All the roads in all the world.
                                She couldn't yet have trotted
      Even to the ... Hist! a stealthy step behind? A ghost?
    _Swish_! A flying noose had caught me round the neck! Garotted!
      Back I staggered, clutching at the moonbeams, yus, almost
                    Throttled! Sir, I boast
      Bill is tough, but ... when it comes to throttling by a ghost!

       *   *   *   *


    XVIII

    Winged like a butterfly, tall and slender
        Out It steps with the rope on its arm.
    "Crumbs," I says, "all right! I surrender!
      When have I crossed you or done you harm?
    _Ef_ you're a sperrit," I says, "O, crikey,
      _Ef_ you're a sperrit, get hence, vamoose!"
    Sweet as music, she spoke--"I'm Psyche!"--
      Choking me still with her silken noose.


    XIX

    Straight at the word from the ferns and blossoms
      Fretting the moon-rise over the downs,
    Little blue wings and little white bosoms,
      Little white faces with golden crowns
    Peeped, and the colours came twinkling round me,
      Laughed, and the turf grew purple with thyme,
    Danced, and the sweet crushed scents nigh drowned me,
      Sang, and the hare-bells rang in chime.


    XX

    All around me, gliding and gleaming,
      Fair as a fallen sunset-sky,
    Butterfly wings came drifting, dreaming,
      Clouds of the little folk clustered nigh,
    Little white hands like pearls uplifted
      Cords of silk in shimmering skeins,
    Cast them about me and dreamily drifted
      Winding me round with their soft warm chains.


    XXI

    Round and round me they dizzily floated,
      Binding me faster with every turn:
    Crumbs, my pals would have grinned and gloated
      Watching me over that fringe of fern,
    Bill, with his battered old hat outstanding
      Black as a foam-swept rock to the moon,
    Bill, like a rainbow of silks expanding
      Into a beautiful big cocoon,--


    XXII

    Big as a cloud, though his hat still crowned him,
      Yus, and his old boots bulged below:
    Seas of colour went shimmering round him,
      Dancing, glimmering, glancing a-glow!
    Bill knew well what them elves were at, sir,--
      Ain't you an en-to-mol-o-gist?
    Well, despite of his old black hat, sir,
     Bill was _becoming--a chrysalist_.

       *   *   *   *


    XXIII

    Muffled, smothered in a sea of emerald and opal,
      Down a dazzling gulf of dreams I sank and sank away,
    Wound about with twenty thousand yards of silken rope, all
      Shimmering into crimson, glimmering into grey,
    Drowsing, waking, living, dying, just as you regards it,
      Buried in a sunset-cloud, or cloud of breaking day,
    'Cording as from East or West yourself might look towards it,
      Losing, gaining, lost in darkness, ragged, grimy, gay,
                    'And-cuffed, not to say
      Gagged, but both my shoulders budding, sprouting white as May.


    XXIV

    Sprouting like the milky buds o' hawthorn in the night-time,
      Pouting like the snowy buds o' roses in July,
    Spreading in my chrysalist and waiting for the right time,
      When--I thought--they'd bust to wings and Bill would rise and fly,
    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, as if it came in answer,
      Sweeping o'er my head again the tide o' dreams went by,--
    _I must get to Piddinghoe to-morrow if I can, sir,_
      _Tick, tack_, a crackle in my chrysalist, a cry!
        Then the warm blue sky
    Bust the shell, and out crept Bill--a blooming butterfly!

       *   *   *   *


    XXV

    Blue as a corn-flower, blazed the zenith: the deepening East like a
        scarlet poppy
      Burned while, dazzled with golden bloom, white clouds like daisies,
          green seas like wheat,
    Gripping the sign-post, first, I climbs, to sun my wings, which were
        wrinkled and floppy,
      Spreading 'em white o'er the words _No Road_, and hanging fast by
          my six black feet.


    XXVI

    Still on my head was the battered old beaver, but through it my clubbed
        antennæ slanted,
      ("Feelers" yourself would probably call 'em) my battered old boots were
           hardly seen
    Under the golden fluff of the tail! It was Bill, sir, Bill, though
        highly enchanted,
      Spreading his beautiful snow-white pinions, tipped with orange, and
          veined with green.


    XXVII

    Yus, old Bill was an Orange-tip, a spirit in glory, a blooming Psyche!
      New, it was new from East to West this rummy old world that I dreamed
          I knew,
    How can I tell you the things that I saw with my--what shall _I_ call 'em?
         --"feelers?"--O, crikey,
      "FEELERS?" You know how the man born blind described such colours as
          scarlet or blue.


    XXVIII

    "Scarlet," he says, "is the sound of a trumpet, blue is a flute,"
        for he hasn't a notion!
      No, nor nobody living on earth can tell it him plain, if he
          hasn't the sight!
    That's how it stands with ragged old Bill, a-drift and a-dream on
        a measureless ocean,
      Gifted wi' fifteen new-born senses, and seeing you blind to their
          new strange light.


    XXIX

    How can I tell you? Sir, you must wait, till you die like Bill, ere
        you understand it!
      Only--I saw--the same as a bee that strikes to his hive ten leagues away--
    Straight as a die, while I winked and blinked on that sun-warmed wood and my
        wings expanded
      (Whistler drawings that men call wings)--I saw--and I flew--that's all
          I can say.


    XXX

    Flew over leagues of whispering wonder, fairy forests and flowery palaces,
      Love-lorn casements, delicate kingdoms, beautiful flaming thoughts
          of--Him;
    Feasts of a million blue-mailed angels lifting their honey-and-wine-brimmed
        chalices,
      Throned upon clouds--(which you'd call white clover) down to the
          world's most rosiest rim.


    XXXI

    New and new and new and new, the white o' the cliffs and the wind
        in the heather,
      Yus, and the sea-gulls flying like flakes of the sea that flashed
          to the new-born day,
    Song, song, song, song, quivering up in the wild blue weather,
      Thousands of seraphim singing together, and me just flying
          and--_knowing my way_.


    XXXII

    Straight as a die to Piddinghoe's dolphin, and there I drops in a
        cottage garden,
      There, on a sun-warmed window-sill, I winks and peeps, for the
          window was wide!
    Crumbs, he was there and fast in her arms and a-begging his poor
        old mother's pardon,
      There with his lips on her old grey hair, and her head on his breast
          while she laughed and cried,--


    XXXIII

    "_One and nine-pence that old tramp gave me, or else I should never have
        reached you, sonny,
      Never, and you just leaving the village to-day and meaning to
          cross the sea,
    One and nine-pence he gave me, I paid for the farmer's lift with
        half o' the money!
      Here's the ten-pence halfpenny, sonny, 'twill pay for our little
          'ouse-warming tea._"

       *   *   *   *


    XXXIV

    _Tick, tack, tick, tack_, out into the garden
      Toddles that old Fairy with his arm about her--so,
    Cuddling of her still, and still a-begging of her pardon,
      While she says "I wish the corn-flower king could only know!
    Bless him, bless him, once again," she says and softly gazes
      Up to heaven, a-smiling in her mutch as white as snow,
    All among her gilly-flowers and stocks and double daisies,
      Mignonette, forget-me-not,... _Twenty years ago_,
                  All a rosy glow,
      _This is how it was_, she said, _Twenty years ago_.

       *   *   *   *


    XXXV

    Once again I seemed to wake, the vision it had fled, sir,
      There I lay upon the downs: the sky was like a peach;
    Yus, with twelve bokays of corn-flowers blue beside my bed, sir,
      More than usual 'andsome, so they'd bring me two-pence each.
    Easy as a poet's dreams they blossomed round my head, sir,
      All I had to do was just to lift my hand and reach,
    Tie 'em with a bit of string, and earn my blooming bread, sir,
      Selling little nose-gays on the bare-foot Brighton beach,
                      Nose-gays _and_ a speech,
      All about the bright blue eyes they matched on Brighton beach.


    XXXVI

    Overhead the singing lark and underfoot the heather,
      Far and blue in front of us the unplumbed sky,
    Me and stick and bundle, O, we jogs along together,
      (Changeable the weather? Well, it ain't all pie!)
    Weather's like a woman, sir, and if she wants to quarrel,
      If her eyes begin to flash and hair begins to fly,
    You've to wait a little, then--the story has a moral--
      Ain't the sunny kisses all the sweeter by and bye?--
                    (Crumbs, it's 'ot and dry!
      Thank you, sir! Thank you, sir!) the sweeter by and bye.


    XXXVII

    So the world's my sweetheart and I sort of want to squeeze 'er.
      Toffs 'ull get no chance of heaven, take 'em in the lump!
    Never laid in hay-fields when the dawn came over-sea, sir?
      Guess it's true that story 'bout the needle and the hump!
    Never crept into a stack because the wind was blowing,
      Hollered out a nest and closed the door-way with a clump,
    Laid and heard the whisper of the silence, growing, growing,
      Watched a thousand wheeling stars and wondered if they'd bump?
                    What I say would stump
      Joshua! But I've done it, sir. Don't think I'm off my chump.


    XXXVIII

    If you try and lay, sir, with your face turned up to wonder,
      Up to twenty million miles of stars that roll like one,
    Right across to God knows where, and you just huddled under
      Like a little beetle with no business of his own,
    There you'd hear--like growing grass--a funny silent sound, sir,
      Mixed with curious crackles in a steady undertone,
    Just the sound of twenty billion stars a-going round, sir,
      Yus, and you beneath 'em like a wise old ant, alone,
                    Ant upon a stone,
      Waving of his antlers, on the Sussex downs, alone.




ON THE DOWNS


    Wide-eyed our childhood roamed the world
      Knee-deep in blowing grass,
    And watched the white clouds crisply curled
      Above the mountain-pass,
    And lay among the purple thyme
      And from its fragrance caught
    Strange hints from some elusive clime
      Beyond the bounds of thought.

    Glimpses of fair forgotten things
      Beyond the gates of birth,
    Half-caught from far off ancient springs
      In heaven, and half of earth;
    And coloured like a fairy-tale
      And whispering evermore
    Half memories from the half-fenced pale
      Of lives we lived before.

    Here, weary of the roaring town
      A-while may I return
    And while the west wind roams the down
      Lie still, lie still and learn:
    Here are green leagues of murmuring wheat
      With blue skies overhead,
    And, all around, the winds are sweet
      With May-bloom, white and red.

    And, to and fro, the bee still hums
      His low unchanging song,
    And the same rustling whisper comes
      As through the ages long:
    Through all the thousands of the years
      That same sweet rumour flows,
    With dreaming skies and gleaming tears
      And kisses and the rose.

    Once more the children throng the lanes,
      Themselves like flowers, to weave
    Their garlands and their daisy-chains
      And listen and believe
    The tale of _Once-upon-a-time_,
      And hear the _Long-ago_
    And _Happy-ever-after_ chime
      Because it must be so.

    And by those thousands of the years
      It is, though scarce we see,
    Dazed with the rainbows of our tears,
      Their steadfast unity,
    It is, or life's disjointed schemes,
      These stones, these ferns unfurled
    With such deep care--a madman's dreams
      Were wisdom to this world!

    Dust into dust! Lie still and learn,
      Hear how the ages sing
    The solemn joy of our return
      To that which makes the Spring:
    Even as we came, with childhood's trust,
      Wide-eyed we go, to Thee
    Who holdest In Thy sacred dust
      The heavenly Springs to be.




A MAY-DAY CAROL


    What is the loveliest light that Spring
      Rosily parting her robe of grey
    Girdled with leaflet green, can fling
      Over the fields where her white feet stray?
    What is the merriest promise of May
      Flung o'er the dew-drenched April flowers?
    Tell me, you on the pear-tree spray--
      _Carol of birds between the showers_.

    What can life at its lightest bring
      Better than this on its brightest day?
    How should we fetter the white-throat's wing
      Wild with joy of its woodland way?
    Sweet, should love for an hour delay,
      Swift, while the primrose-time is ours!
    What is the lover's royallest lay?--
      _Carol of birds between the showers_.

    What is the murmur of bees a-swing?
      What is the laugh of a child at play?
    What is the song that the angels sing?
      (Where were the tune could the sweet notes stay
    Longer than this, to kiss and betray?)
      Nay, on the blue sky's topmost towers,
    What is the song of the seraphim? Say--
      _Carol of birds between the showers._

    Thread the stars on a silver string,
      (So did they sing in Bethlehem's bowers!)
    Mirth for a little one, grief for a king,
      _Carol of birds between the showers_.




THE CALL OF THE SPRING


    Come, choose your road and away, my lad,
      Come, choose your road and away!
    We'll out of the town by the road's bright crown
      As it dips to the dazzling day.
    It's a long white road for the weary;
      But it rolls through the heart of the May.

    Though many a road would merrily ring
      To the tramp of your marching feet,
    All roads are one from the day that's done,
      And the miles are swift and sweet,
    And the graves of your friends are the mile-stones
      To the land where all roads meet.

    But the call that you hear this day, my lad,
      Is the Spring's old bugle of mirth
    When the year's green fire in a soul's desire
      Is brought like a rose to the birth;
    And knights ride out to adventure
      As the flowers break out of the earth.

    Over the sweet-smelling mountain-passes
      The clouds lie brightly curled;
    The wild-flowers cling to the crags and swing
      With cataract-dews impearled;
    And the way, the way that you choose this day
      Is the way to the end of the world.

    It rolls from the golden long ago
      To the land that we ne'er shall find;
    And it's uphill here, but it's downhill there,
      For the road is wise and kind,
    And all rough places and cheerless faces
      Will soon be left behind.

    Come, choose your road and away, away,
      We'll follow the gipsy sun,
    For it's soon, too soon to the end of the day,
      And the day is well begun;
    And the road rolls on through the heart of the May,
      And there's never a May but one.

    There's a fir-wood here, and a dog-rose there,
      And a note of the mating dove;
    And a glimpse, maybe, of the warm blue sea,
      And the warm white clouds above;
    And warm to your breast in a tenderer nest
      Your sweetheart's little glove.

    There's not much better to win, my lad,
      There's not much better to win!
    You have lived, you have loved, you have fought, you have proved
      The worth of folly and sin;
    So now come out of the City's rout,
      Come out of the dust and the din.

    Come out,--a bundle and stick is all
      You'll need to carry along,
    If your heart can carry a kindly word,
      And your lips can carry a song;
    You may leave the lave to the keep o' the grave,
      If your lips can carry a song!

    _Come, choose your road and away, my lad,
      Come, choose your road and away!
    We'll out of the town by the road's bright crown,
      As it dips to the sapphire day!
    All roads may meet at the world's end,
      But, hey for the heart of the May!
    Come, choose your road and away, dear lad,
      Come choose your road and away._




A DEVONSHIRE DITTY


    I

    In a leafy lane of Devon
      There's a cottage that I know,
        Then a garden--then, a grey old crumbling wall,
    And the wall's the wall of heaven
      (Where I hardly care to go)
        And there isn't any fiery sword at all.


    II

    But I never went to heaven.
      There was right good reason why,
        For they sent a shining angel to me there,
    An angel, down in Devon,
      (Clad in muslin by the bye)
        With the halo of the sunshine on her hair.


    III

    Ah, whate'er the darkness covers,
      And whate'er we sing or say,
        Would you climb the wall of heaven an hour too soon
    If you knew a place for lovers
      Where the apple-blossoms stray
        Out of heaven to sway and whisper to the moon?


    IV

    When we die--we'll think of Devon
      Where the garden's all aglow
        With the flowers that stray across the grey old wall:
    Then we'll climb it, out of heaven,
      From the other side, you know,
    Straggle over it from heaven
      With the apple-blossom snow,
    Tumble back again to Devon
      Laugh and love as long ago,
    Where there isn't any fiery sword at all.




BACCHUS AND THE PIRATES


    Half a hundred terrible pig-tails, pirates famous in song and story,
      Hoisting the old black flag once more, in a palmy harbour of Caribbee,
    "Farewell" we waved to our brown-skinned lasses, and chorussing out to
        the billows of glory,
      Billows a-glitter with rum and gold, we followed the sunset over the sea.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred broad-sheet pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Sea-roads plated with pieces of eight that rolled to a heaven by rum
        made mellow,
      Heaved and coloured our barque's black nose where the Lascar sang
          to a twinkling star,
    And the tangled bow-sprit plunged and dipped its point in the west's
        wild red and yellow,
      Till the curved white moon crept out astern like a naked knife
          from a blue cymar.

          _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
            Our capstan song we sung:
          Half a hundred terrible pirates
            When the world was young!_

    Half a hundred tarry pig-tails, Teach, the chewer of glass, had taught us,
      Taught us to balance the plank ye walk, your little plank-bridge
          to Kingdom Come:
    Half a score had sailed with Flint, and a dozen or so the devil
        had brought us
      Back from the pit where Blackbeard lay, in Beelzebub's bosom,
          a-screech for rum.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred piping pirates
          When the world was young!_

    There was Captain Hook (of whom ye have heard--so called from his terrible
        cold steel twister,
      His own right hand having gone to a shark with a taste for skippers
          on pirate-trips),
    There was Silver himself, with his cruel crutch, and the blind man Pew,
         with a phiz like a blister,
      Gouged and white and dreadfully dried in the reek of a thousand
          burning ships.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred cut-throat pirates
          When the world was young!_

    With our silver buckles and French cocked hats and our skirted coats
        (they were growing greener,
      But green and gold look well when spliced! We'd trimmed 'em up
          wi' some fine fresh lace)
    Bravely over the seas we danced to the horn-pipe tune of a concertina,
      Cutlasses jetting beneath our skirts and cambric handkerchiefs
          all in place.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred elegant pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And our black prow grated, one golden noon, on the happiest isle of
        the Happy Islands,
      An isle of Paradise, fair as a gem, on the sparkling breast of the
          wine-dark deep,
    An isle of blossom and yellow sand, and enchanted vines on the purple
        highlands,
      Wi' grapes like melons, nay clustering suns, a-sprawl over cliffs in
          their noonday sleep.

        _While earth goes round let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred dream-struck pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And lo! on the soft warm edge of the sand, where the sea like wine
        in a golden noggin
      Creamed, and the rainbow-bubbles clung to his flame-red hair,
          a white youth lay,
    Sleeping; and now, as his drowsy grip relaxed, the cup that he
        squeezed his grog in
      Slipped from his hand and its purple dregs were mixed with the flames
          and flakes of spray.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred diffident pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And we suddenly saw (had we seen them before? They were coloured like
        sand or the pelt on his shoulders)
      His head was pillowed on two great leopards, whose breathing rose
          and sank with his own;
    Now a pirate is bold, but the vision was rum and would _call_ for rum
        in the best of beholders,
      And it seemed we had seen Him before, in a dream, with that flame-red
          hair and that vine-leaf crown.

        _And the earth went round, and the rum went round,
          And softlier now we sung:
        Half a hundred awe-struck pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Now Timothy Hook (of whom ye have heard, with his talon of steel)
        our doughty skipper,
      A man that, in youth being brought up pious, had many a book on
        his cabin-shelf,
    Suddenly caught at a comrade's hand with the tearing claws of his
        cold steel flipper
      And cried, "Great Thunder and Brimstone, boys, I've hit it at last!
        _'Tis Bacchus himself._"

        _And the earth went round, and the rum went round,
          And never a word we sung:
        Half a hundred tottering pirates
          When the world was young!_

    He flung his French cocked hat i' the foam (though its lace was the best
        of his wearing apparel):
      We stared at him--Bacchus! The sea reeled round like a wine-vat
          splashing with purple dreams,
    And the sunset-skies were dashed with blood of the grape as the sun
        like a new-staved barrel
      Flooded the tumbling West with wine and spattered the clouds with
          crimson gleams.

        _And the earth went round, and our heads went round,
          And never a word we sung:
        Half a hundred staggering pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Down to the ship for a fishing-net our crafty Hook sent Silver leaping;
      Back he came on his pounding crutch, for all the world like a kangaroo;
    And we caught the net and up to the Sleeper on hands and knees we all
        went creeping,
      Flung it across him and staked it down! 'Twas the best of our dreams
          and the dream was true.

        _And the earth went round, and the rum went round,
          And loudly now we sung:
        Half a hundred jubilant pirates
          When the world was young!_

    We had caught our god, and we got him aboard ere he woke (he was more
        than a little heavy);
      Glittering, beautiful, flushed he lay in the lurching bows of
          the old black barque,
    As the sunset died and the white moon dawned, and we saw on the island
        a star-bright bevy
      Of naked Bacchanals stealing to watch through the whispering vines in
          the purple dark!

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our capstan song we sung:
        Half a hundred innocent pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Beautiful under the sailing moon, in the tangled net, with the leopards
        beside him,
      Snared like a wild young red-lipped merman, wilful, petulant,
          flushed he lay;
    While Silver and Hook in their big sea-boots and their boat-cloaks
        guarded and gleefully eyed him,
      Thinking what Bacchus might do for a seaman, like standing him drinks,
          as a man might say.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          We sailed away and sung:
        Half a hundred fanciful pirates
          When the world was young!_

    All the grog that ever was heard of, gods, was it stowed in our
        sure possession?
      O, the pictures that broached the skies and poured their colours
          across our dreams!
    O, the thoughts that tapped the sunset, and rolled like a great
        torchlight procession
      Down our throats in a glory of glories, a roaring splendour
          of golden streams!

        _And the earth went round, and the stars went round,
          As we hauled the sheets and sung:
        Half a hundred infinite pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Beautiful, white, at the break of day, He woke and, the net in a
        smoke dissolving,
      He rose like a flame, with his yellow-eyed pards and his
          flame-red hair like a windy dawn,
    And the crew kept back, respectful like, till the leopards advanced
        with their eyes revolving,
      Then up the rigging went Silver and Hook, and the rest of us followed
          with case-knives drawn.

        _While earth goes round, let rum go round,
          Our cross-tree song we sung:
        Half a hundred terrified pirates
          When the world was young!_

    And "Take me home to my happy island!" he says. "Not I," sings Hook,
        "by thunder;
      We'll take you home to a happier isle, our palmy harbour of Caribbee!"
    "You won't!" says Bacchus, and quick as a dream the planks of the deck just
        heaved asunder,
      And a mighty Vine came straggling up that grew from the depths of
          the wine-dark sea.

        _And the sea went round, and the skies went round,
          As our cross-tree song we sung:
        Half a hundred horrified pirates
          When the world was young!_

    We were anchored fast as an oak on land, and the branches clutched and
        the tendrils quickened,
      And bound us writhing like snakes to the spars! Ay, we hacked with our
          knives at the boughs in vain,
    And Bacchus laughed loud on the decks below, as ever the tough sprays
        tightened and thickened,
      And the blazing hours went by, and we gaped with thirst and our ribs
          were racked with pain

        _And the skies went round, and the sea swam round,
          And we knew not what we sung:
        Half a hundred lunatic pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Bunch upon bunch of sunlike grapes, as we writhed and struggled and raved
        and strangled,
      Bunch upon bunch of gold and purple daubed its bloom on our baked
          black lips.
    Clustering grapes, O, bigger than pumpkins, just out of reach they
         bobbed and dangled
      Over the vine-entangled sails of that most dumbfounded of pirate ships!

        _And the sun went round, and the moon came round,
          And mocked us where we hung:
        Half a hundred maniac pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Over the waters the white moon winked its bruised old eye at our
        bowery prison,
      When suddenly we were aware of a light such as never a moon
          or a ship's lamp throws,
    And a shallop of pearl, like a Nautilus shell, came shimmering up
        as by magic arisen,
      With sails: of silk and a glory around it that turned the sea
          to a rippling rose.

        _And our heads went round, and the stars went round,
          At the song that cruiser sung:
        Half a hundred goggle-eyed pirates
          When the world was young!_

    Half a hundred rose-white Bacchanals hauled the ropes of that rosy cruiser!
      Over the seas they came and laid their little white hands on the old
          black barque;
    And Bacchus he ups and he steps aboard: "Hi, stop!" cries Hook,
        "you frantic old boozer!
      Belay, below there, don't you go and leave poor pirates to
          die in the dark!"

        _And the moon went round, and the stars went round,
          As they all pushed off and sung:
        Half a hundred ribbonless Bacchanals
          When the world was young!_

    Over the seas they went and Bacchus he stands, with his yellow-eyed
        leopards beside him,
      High on the poop of rose and pearl, and kisses his hand to us,
          pleasant as pie!
    While the Bacchanals danced to their tambourines, and the vine-leaves
        flew, and Hook just eyed him
      Once, as a man that was brought up pious, and scornfully hollers,
          "_Well, you ain't shy!_"

            _For all around him, vine-leaf crowned,
              The wild white Bacchanals flung!
            Nor it wasn't a sight for respectable pirates
              When the world was young!_

    All around that rainbow-Nautilus rippled the bloom of a thousand roses,
      Nay, but the sparkle of fairy sea-nymphs breasting a fairy-like
          sea of wine,
    Swimming around it in murmuring thousands, with white arms tossing;
        till--all that _we_ knows is
      The light went out, and the night was dark, and the grapes had
          burst and their juice was--brine!

            _And the vines that bound our bodies round
              Were plain wet ropes that clung,
            Squeezing the light out o' fifty pirates
              When the world was young!_

    Over the seas in the pomp of dawn a king's ship came with her proud
        flag flying.
      Cloud upon cloud we watched her tower with her belts and her crowded
         zones of sail;
    And an A.B. perched in a white crow's nest, with a brass-rimmed
        spy-glass quietly spying,
      As we swallowed the lumps in our choking throats and uttered
          our last faint feeble hail!

            _And our heads went round as the ship went round,
              And we thought how coves had swung:
            All for playing at broad-sheet pirates
              When the world was young!_

    Half a hundred trembling corsairs, all cut loose, but a trifle giddy,
      We lands on their trim white decks at last and the bo'sun he whistles us
          good hot grog,
    And we tries to confess, but there wasn't a soul from the Admiral's
        self to the gold-laced middy
      But says, "They're delirious still, poor chaps," and the Cap'n he
          enters the fact in his log,

            _That his boat's crew found us nearly drowned
              In a barrel without a bung--
            Half a hundred suffering sea-cooks
              When the world was young!_

    So we sailed by Execution Dock, where the swinging pirates haughty
         and scornful
      Rattled their chains, and on Margate beach we came like a school-treat
          safe to land;
    And one of us took to religion at once; and the rest of the crew, tho'
        their hearts were mournful,
      Capered about as Christy Minstrels, while Hook conducted the big
          brass band.

            _And the sun went round, and the moon went round,
              And, O, 'twas a thought that stung!
            There was none to believe we were broad-sheet pirates
              When the world was young!_

    Ah, yet (if ye stand me a noggin of rum) shall the old Blue Dolphin echo
        the story!
      We'll hoist the white cross-bones again in our palmy harbour of Caribbee!
    We'll wave farewell to our brown-skinned lasses and, chorussing out to the
        billows of glory,
      Billows a-glitter with rum and gold, we'll follow the sunset over the sea!

            _While earth goes round, let rum go round!
              O, sing it as we sung!
            Half a hundred terrible pirates
              When the world was young!_




THE NEWSPAPER BOY


    I

    Elf of the City, a lean little hollow-eyed boy
      Ragged and tattered, but lithe as a slip of the Spring,
    Under the lamp-light he runs with a reckless joy
     Shouting a murderer's doom or the death of a King.

    Out of the darkness he leaps like a wild strange hint,
      Herald of tragedy, comedy, crime and despair,
    Waving a poster that hurls you, in fierce black print
      One word _Mystery_, under the lamp's white glare.


    II

    Elf of the night of the City he darts with his crew
      Out of a vaporous furnace of colour that wreathes
    Magical letters a-flicker from crimson to blue
      High overhead. All round him the mad world seethes.
    Hansoms, like cantering beetles, with diamond eyes
      Run through the moons of it; busses in yellow and red
    Hoot; and St. Paul's is a bubble afloat in the skies,
      Watching the pale moths flit and the dark death's head.


    III

    Painted and powdered they shimmer and rustle and stream
      Westward, the night moths, masks of the Magdalen! See,
    Puck of the revels, he leaps through the sinister dream
      Waving his elfin evangel of _Mystery_,
    Puck of the bubble or dome of their scoffing or trust,
      Puck of the fairy-like tower with the clock in its face,
    Puck of an Empire that whirls on a pellet of dust
      Bearing his elfin device thro' the splendours of space.


    IV

    _Mystery_--is it the scribble of doom on the dark,
      Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin, again?
    _Mystery_--is it a scrap of remembrance, a spark
      Burning still in the fog of a blind world's brain?
    Elf of the gossamer tangles of shadow and light,
      Wild electrical webs and the battle that rolls
    League upon perishing league thro' the ravenous night,
      Breaker on perishing breaker of human souls.


    V

    Soaked in the colours, a flake of the flying spray
      Flung over wreckage and yeast of the murderous town,
    Onward he flaunts it, innocent, vicious and gay,
      Prophet of prayers that are stifled and loves that drown,
    Urchin and sprat of the City that roars like a sea
      Surging around him in hunger and splendour and shame,
    Cruelty, luxury, madness, he leaps in his glee
      Out of the mazes of mist and the vistas of flame.


    VI

    Ragged and tattered he scurries away in the gloom:
      Over the thundering traffic a moment his cry
    Mystery! Mystery!--reckless of death and doom
      Rings; and the great wheels roll and the world goes by.
    Lost, is it lost, that hollow-eyed flash of the light?--
      Poor little face flying by with the word that saves,
    Pale little mouth of the mask of the measureless night,
      Shrilling the heart of it, lost like the foam on its waves!




THE TWO WORLDS


    This outer world is but the pictured scroll
      Of worlds within the soul,
    A coloured chart, a blazoned missal-book
      Whereon who rightly look
    May spell the splendours with their mortal eyes
      And steer to Paradise.

    O, well for him that knows and early knows
      In his own soul the rose
    Secretly burgeons, of this earthly flower
      The heavenly paramour:
    And all these fairy dreams of green-wood fern,
      These waves that break and yearn,
    Shadows and hieroglyphs, hills, clouds and seas,
      Faces and flowers and trees,
    Terrestrial picture-parables, relate
      Each to its heavenly mate.

    O, well for him that finds in sky and sea
            This two-fold mystery,
    And loses not (as painfully he spells
            The fine-spun syllables)
    The cadences, the burning inner gleam,
            The poet's heavenly dream.

    Well for the poet if this earthly chart
            Be printed in his heart,
    When to his world of spirit woods and seas
            With eager face he flees
    And treads the untrodden fields of unknown flowers
            And threads the angelic bowers,
    And hears that unheard nightingale whose moan
            Trembles within his own,
    And lovers murmuring in the leafy lanes
            Of his own joys and pains.

    For though he voyages further than the flight
            Of earthly day and night,
    Traversing to the sky's remotest ends
            A world that he transcends,
    Safe, he shall hear the hidden breakers roar
            Against the mystic shore;
    Shall roam the yellow sands where sirens bare
            Their breasts and wind their hair;
    Shall with their perfumed tresses blind his eyes,
            And still possess the skies.

    He, where the deep unearthly jungles are,
            Beneath his Eastern star
    Shall pass the tawny lion in his den
            And cross the quaking fen.
    He learnt his path (and treads it undefiled)
            When, as a little child,
    He bent his head with long and loving looks
            O'er earthly picture-books.
    His earthly love nestles against his side,
            His young celestial guide.




GORSE


    Between my face and the warm blue sky
    The crisp white clouds go sailing by,
      And the only sound is the sound of your breathing,
    The song of a bird and the sea's long sigh.

    Here, on the downs, as a tale re-told
    The sprays of the gorse are a-blaze with gold,
      As of old, on the sea-washed hills of my boyhood,
    Breathing the same sweet scent as of old.

    Under a ragged golden spray
    The great sea sparkles far away,
      Beautiful, bright, as my heart remembers
    Many a dazzle of waves in May.

    Long ago as I watched them shine
    Under the boughs of fir and pine,
      Here I watch them to-day and wonder,
    Here, with my love's hand warm in mine.

    The soft wings pass that we used to chase,
    Dreams that I dreamed had left not a trace,
      The same, the same, with the bars of crimson
    The green-veined white, with its floating grace,

    The same to the least bright fleck on their wings!
    And I close my eyes, and a lost bird sings,
      And a far sea sighs, and the old sweet fragrance
    Wraps me round with the dear dead springs,

    Wraps me round with the springs to be
    When lovers that think not of you or me
      Laugh, but our eyes will be closed in darkness,
    Closed to the sky and the gorse and the sea,

    And the same great glory of ragged gold
    Once more, once more, as a tale re-told
      Shall whisper their hearts with the same sweet fragrance
    And their warm hands cling, as of old, as of old.

    Dead and un-born, the same blue skies
    Cover us! Love, as I read your eyes,
      Do I not know whose love enfolds us,
    As we fold the past in our memories,

    Past, present, future, the old and the new?
    From the depths of the grave a cry breaks through
      And trembles, a sky-lark blind in the azure,
    The depths of the all-enfolding blue.

    O, resurrection of folded years
    Deep in our hearts, with your smiles and tears,
      Dead and un-born shall not He remember
    Who folds our cry in His heart, and hears.




FOR THE EIGHTIETH BIRTHDAY OF GEORGE MEREDITH


    A health, a ringing health, unto the king
      Of all our hearts to-day! But what proud song
      Should follow on the thought, nor do him wrong?
    Except the sea were harp, each mirthful string
    The lovely lightning of the nights of Spring,
      And Dawn the lonely listener, glad and grave
      With colours of the sea-shell and the wave
    In brightening eye and cheek, there is none to sing!

    Drink to him, as men upon an Alpine peak
      Brim one immortal cup of crimson wine,
        And into it drop one pure cold crust of snow,
    Then hold it up, too rapturously to speak
      And drink--to the mountains, line on glittering line,
        Surging away into the sunset-glow.




IN MEMORY OF SWINBURNE


    I

    April from shore to shore, from sea to sea,
      April in heaven and on the springing spray
      Buoyant with birds that sing to welcome May
    And April in those eyes that mourn for thee:
    "This is my singing month; my hawthorn tree
      Burgeons once more," we seemed to hear thee say,
      "This is my singing month: my fingers stray
    Over the lute. What shall the music be?"

    And April answered with too great a song
      For mortal lips to sing or hearts to hear,
    Heard only of that high invisible throng
      For whom thy song makes April all the year!
    "My singing month, what bringest thou?" Her breath
    Swooned with all music, and she answered--"Death."


    II

    Ah, but on earth,--"can'st thou, too, die,"
      Low she whispers, "lover of mine?"
    April, queen over earth and sky
      Whispers, her trembling lashes shine:
    "Wings of the sea, good-bye, good-bye,
      Down to the dim sea-line."

    Home to the heart of thine old-world lover,
      Home to thy "fair green-girdled" sea!
    There shall thy soul with the sea-birds hover,
      Free of the deep as their wings are free;
    Free, for the grave-flowers only cover
      This, the dark cage of thee.

    Thee, the storm-bird, nightingale-souled,
      Brother of Sappho, the seas reclaim!
    Age upon age have the great waves rolled
      Mad with her music, exultant, aflame;
    Thee, thee too, shall their glory enfold,
      Lit with thy snow-winged fame.

    Back, thro' the years, fleets the sea-bird's wing:
      _Sappho, of old time, once_,--ah, hark!
    So did he love her of old and sing!
      Listen, he flies to her, back thro' the dark!
    _Sappho, of old time, once_.... Yea, Spring
      Calls him home to her, hark!

    _Sappho, long since, in the years far sped,
      Sappho, I loved thee!_ Did I not seem
    Fosterling only of earth? I have fled,
      Fled to thee, sister. Time is a dream!
    Shelley is here with us! Death lies dead!
      Ah, how the bright waves gleam.

    Wide was the cage-door, idly swinging;
      April touched me and whispered "Come."
    Out and away to the great deep winging,
      Sister, I flashed to thee over the foam,
    Out to the sea of Eternity, singing
      "Mother, thy child comes home."

       *   *   *   *

    Ah, but how shall we welcome May
      Here where the wing of song droops low,
    Here by the last green swinging spray
      Brushed by the sea-bird's wings of snow,
    We that gazed on his glorious way
      Out where the great winds blow?

    _Here upon earth--"can'st thou, too, die,
      Lover of life and lover of mine?"
    April, conquering earth and sky
      Whispers, her trembling lashes shine:
    "Wings of the sea, good-bye, good-bye,
      Down to the dim sea-line."_




ON THE DEATH OF FRANCIS THOMPSON


    I

    How grandly glow the bays
      Purpureally enwound
    With those rich thorns, the brows
      How infinitely crowned
    That now thro' Death's dark house
      Have passed with royal gaze:
    Purpureally enwound
      How grandly glow the bays.


    II

    Sweet, sweet and three-fold sweet,
      Pulsing with three-fold pain,
    Where the lark fails of flight
      Soared the celestial strain;
    Beyond the sapphire height
      Flew the gold-wingèd feet,
    Beautiful, pierced with pain,
      Sweet, sweet and three-fold sweet;


    III

    And where _Is not_ and _Is_
      Are wed in one sweet Name,
    And the world's rootless vine
      With dew of stars a-flame
    Laughs, from those deep divine
      Impossibilities,
    Our reason all to shame--
      _This cannot be, but is;_


    IV

    Into the Vast, the Deep
      Beyond all mortal sight,
    The Nothingness that conceived
      The worlds of day and night,
    The Nothingness that heaved
      Pure sides in virgin sleep,
    Brought out of Darkness, light;
      And man from out the Deep.


    V

    Into that Mystery
      Let not thine hand be thrust:
    Nothingness is a world
      Thy science well may trust ...
    But lo, a leaf unfurled,
      Nay, a cry mocking thee
    From the first grain of dust--
      _I am, yet cannot be!_


    VI

    Adventuring un-afraid
      Into that last deep shrine,
    Must not the child-heart see
      Its deepest symbol shine,
    The world's Birth-mystery,
      Whereto the suns are shade?
    Lo, the white breast divine--
      The holy Mother-maid!


    VII

    How miss that Sacrifice,
      That cross of Yea and Nay,
    That paradox of heaven
      Whose palms point either way,
    Through each a nail being driven
      That the arms out-span the skies
    And our earth-dust this day
      Out-sweeten Paradise.

    VIII

    We part the seamless robe,
      Our wisdom would divide
    The raiment of the King,
      Our spear is in His side,
    Even while the angels sing
      Around our perishing globe,
    And Death re-knits in pride
      The seamless purple robe.

       *   *   *   *


    IX

    _How grandly glow the bays
      Purpureally enwound
    With those rich thorns, the brows
      How infinitely crowned
    That now thro' Death's dark house
      Have passed with royal gaze:
    Purpureally enwound
      How grandly glow the bays._




IN MEMORY OF MEREDITH


    I

    High on the mountains, who stands proudly, clad with the light of May,
    Rich as the dawn, deep-hearted as night, diamond-bright as day,
    Who, while the slopes of the beautiful valley throb with our muffled tread
    Who, with the hill-flowers wound in her tresses, welcomes our
        deathless dead?


    II

    Is it not she whom he sought so long thro' the high lawns dewy and sweet,
    Up thro' the crags and the glittering snows faint-flushed with her
        rosy feet,
    Is it not she--the queen of our night--crowned by the unseen sun,
    Artemis, she that can see the light, when light upon earth is none?


    III

    Huntress, queen of the dark of the world (no darker at night than noon)
    Beauty immortal and undefiled, the Eternal sun's white moon,
    Only by thee and thy silver shafts for a flash can our hearts discern,
    Pierced to the quick, the love, the love that still thro' the dark
        doth yearn.


    IV

    What to his soul were the hill-flowers, what the gold at the break of day
    Shot thro' the red-stemmed firs to the lake where the swimmer
        clove his way,
    What were the quivering harmonies showered from the heaven-tossed heart
        of the lark,
    Artemis, Huntress, what were these but thy keen shafts cleaving the dark?


    V

    Frost of the hedge-row, flash of the jasmine, sparkle of dew on the leaf,
    Seas lit wide by the summer lightning, shafts from thy diamond sheaf,
    Deeply they pierced him, deeply he loved thee, now has he found thy soul,
    Artemis, thine, in this bridal peal, where we hear but the death-bell toll.




THE TESTIMONY OF ART


    As earth, sad earth, thrusts many a gloomy cape
      Into the sea's bright colour and living glee,
      So do we strive to embay that mystery
    Which earthly hands must ever let escape;
    The Word we seek for is the golden shape
      That shall enshrine the Soul we cannot see,
      A temporal chalice of Eternity
    Purple with beating blood of the hallowed grape.

    Once was it wine and sacramental bread
      Whereby we knew the power that through Him smiled
        When, in one still small utterance, He hurled
    The Eternities beneath His feet and said
      With lips, O meek as any little child,
        _Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world._




THE SCHOLARS


    Where is the scholar whose clear mind can hold
      The floral text of one sweet April mead?--
      The flowing lines, which few can spell indeed
    Though most will note the scarlet and the gold
    Around the flourishing capitals grandly scrolled;
      But ah, the subtle cadences that need
      The lover's heart, the lover's heart to read,
    And ah, the songs unsung, the tales untold.

    Poor fools-capped scholars--grammar keeps us close,
      The primers thrall us, and our eyes grow dim:
        When will old Master Science hear the call,
    Bid us run free with life in every limb
      To breathe the poems and hear the last red rose
        Gossiping over God's grey garden-wall?




RESURRECTION


    Once more I hear the everlasting sea
      Breathing beneath the mountain's fragrant breast,
    _Come unto Me, come unto Me,
      And I will give you rest._

    We have destroyed the Temple and in three days
      He hath rebuilt it--all things are made new:
    And hark what wild throats pour His praise
      Beneath the boundless blue.

    We plucked down all His altars, cried aloud
      And gashed ourselves for little gods of clay!
    Yon floating cloud was but a cloud,
      The May no more than May.

    We plucked down all His altars, left not one
      Save where, perchance (and ah, the joy was fleet),
    We laid our garlands in the sun
      At the white Sea-born's feet.

    We plucked down all His altars, not to make
      The small praise greater, but the great praise less,
    We sealed all fountains where the soul could slake
      Its thirst and weariness.

    "Love" was too small, too human to be found
      In that transcendent source whence love was born:
    We talked of "forces": heaven was crowned
      With philosophic thorn.

    "Your God is in your image," we cried, but O,
      'Twas only man's own deepest heart ye gave,
    Knowing that He transcended all ye know,
      While we--we dug His grave.

    Denied Him even the crown on our own brow,
      E'en these poor symbols of His loftier reign,
    Levelled His Temple with the dust, and now
      He is risen, He is risen again,

    Risen, like this resurrection of the year,
      This grand ascension of the choral spring,
    Which those harp-crowded heavens bend to hear
      And meet upon the wing.

    "He is dead," we cried, and even amid that gloom
      The wintry veil was rent! The new-born day
    Showed us the Angel seated in the tomb
      And the stone rolled away.

    It is the hour! We challenge heaven above
      Now, to deny our slight ephemeral breath
    Joy, anguish, and that everlasting love
      Which triumphs over death.




A JAPANESE LOVE-SONG


    I

    The young moon is white,
      But the willows are blue:
    Your small lips are red,
      But the great clouds are grey:
    The waves are so many
      That whisper to you;
    But my love is only
      One flight of spray.


    II

    The bright drops are many,
      The dark wave is one:
    The dark wave subsides,
      And the bright sea remains!
    And wherever, O singing
      Maid, you may run,
    You are one with the world
      For all your pains.


    III

    Though the great skies are dark,
      And your small feet are white,
    Though your wide eyes are blue
      And the closed poppies red,
    Tho' the kisses are many
      That colour the night,
    They are linked like pearls
      On one golden thread.


    IV

    Were the grey clouds not made
      For the red of your mouth;
    The ages for flight
      Of the butterfly years;
    The sweet of the peach
      For the pale lips of drouth,
    The sunlight of smiles
      For the shadow of tears?


    V

    Love, Love is the thread
      That has pierced them with bliss!
    All their hues are but notes
      In one world-wide tune:
    Lips, willows, and waves,
      We are one as we kiss,
    And your face and the flowers
      Faint away in the moon.



THE TWO PAINTERS

(A TALE OF OLD JAPAN.)


    I

    Yoichi Tenko, the painter,
      Dwelt by the purple sea,
    Painting the peacock islands
      Under his willow-tree:
    Also in temples he painted
      Dragons of old Japan,
    With a child to look at the pictures--
      Little O Kimi San.

    Kimi, the child of his brother,
      Bright as the moon in May,
    White as a lotus lily,
      Pink as a plum-tree spray,
    Linking her soft arm round him
      Sang to his heart for an hour,
    Kissed him with ripples of laughter
      And lips of the cherry flower.

    Child of the old pearl-fisher
      Lost in his junk at sea,
    Kimi was loved of Tenko
      As his own child might be,
    Yoichi Tenko the painter,
      Wrinkled and grey and old,
    Teacher of many disciples
      That paid for his dreams with gold.


    II

    Peonies, peonies crowned the May!
    Clad in blue and white array
      Came Sawara to the school
    Under the silvery willow-tree,
      All to learn of Tenko!
    Riding on a milk-white mule,
      Young and poor and proud was he,
    Lissom as a cherry spray
    (Peonies, peonies, crowned the day!)
    And he rode the golden way
      To the school of Tenko.

    Swift to learn, beneath his hand
    Soon he watched his wonderland
      Growing cloud by magic cloud,
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko:
    Kimi watched him, young and proud,
      Painting by the purple sea,
    Lying on the golden sand
    Watched his golden wings expand!
    (None but Love will understand
      All she hid from Tenko.)

    He could paint her tree and flower,
    Sea and spray and wizard's tower,
      With one stroke, now hard, now soft,
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko:
    He could fling a bird aloft,
      Splash a dragon in the sea,
    Crown a princess in her bower,
    With one stroke of magic power;
    And she watched him, hour by hour,
      In the school of Tenko.

    Yoichi Tenko, wondering, scanned
    All the work of that young hand,
      Gazed his kakemonos o'er,
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko:
    "I can teach you nothing more,
      Thought or craft or mystery;
    Let your golden wings expand,
    They will shadow half the land,
    All the world's at your command,
      Come no more to Tenko."

    _Lying on the golden sand,
    Kimi watched his wings expand;
    Wept.--He could not understand
      Why she wept, said Tenko._


    III

    So, in her blue kimono,
      Pale as the sickle moon
    Glimmered thro' soft plum-branches
      Blue in the dusk of June,
    Stole she, willing and waning,
      Frightened and unafraid,--
    "Take me with you, Sawara,
      Over the sea," she said.

    Small and sadly beseeching,
      Under the willow-tree,
    Glimmered her face like a foam-flake
      Drifting over the sea:
    Pale as a drifting blossom,
      Lifted her face to his eyes:
    Slowly he gathered and held her
      Under the drifting skies.

    Poor little face cast backward,
      Better to see his own,
    Earth and heaven went past them
      Drifting: they two, alone
    Stood, immortal. He whispered--
      "Nothing can part us two!"
    Backward her sad little face went
      Drifting, and dreamed it true.

    "Others are happy," she murmured,
      "Maidens and men I have seen;
    You are my king, Sawara,
      O, let me be your queen!
    If I am all too lowly,"
      Sadly she strove to smile,
    "Let me follow your footsteps,
      Your slave for a little while."

    Surely, he thought, I have painted
      Nothing so fair as this
    Moonlit almond blossom
      Sweet to fold and kiss,
    Brow that is filled with music,
      Shell of a faery sea,
    Eyes like the holy violets
      Brimmed with dew for me.

    "Wait for Sawara," he whispered,
      "Does not his whole heart yearn
    Now to his moon-bright maiden?
      Wait, for he will return
    Rich as the wave on the moon's path
      Rushing to claim his bride!"
    So they plighted their promise,
      And the ebbing sea-wave sighed.


    IV

    Moon and flower and butterfly,
    Earth and heaven went drifting by,
      Three long years while Kimi dreamed
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      In the school of Tenko,
    Steadfast while the whole world streamed
      Past her tow'rds Eternity;
    Steadfast till with one great cry,
    Ringing to the gods on high,
    Golden wings should blind the sky
      And bring him back to Tenko.

    Three long years and nought to say
    "Sweet, I come the golden way,
      Riding royally to the school
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      Claim my bride of Tenko;
    Silver bells on a milk-white mule,
      Rose-red sails on an emerald sea!" ...
    Kimi sometimes went to pray
    In the temple nigh the bay,
    Dreamed all night and gazed all day
      Over the sea from Tenko.

    Far away his growing fame
    Lit the clouds. No message came
      From the sky, whereon she gazed
    Under the silvery willow-tree
      Far away from Tenko!
    Small white hands in the temple raised
      Pleaded with the Mystery,--
    "Stick of incense in the flame,
    Though my love forget my name,
    Help him, bless him, all the same,
    And ... bring him back to Tenko!"

    _Rose-white temple nigh the bay,
    Hush! for Kimi comes to pray,
    Dream all night and gaze all day
      Over the sea from Tenko._


    V

    So, when the rich young merchant
      Showed him his bags of gold,
    Yoichi Tenko, the painter,
      Gave him her hand to hold,
    Said: "You shall wed him, O Kimi."
      Softly he lied and smiled--
    "_Yea, for Sawara is wedded!
      Let him not mock you, child._"

    Dumbly she turned and left them,
      Never a word or cry
    Broke from her lips' grey petals
      Under the drifting sky:
    Down to the spray and the rainbows,
      Where she had watched him of old
    Painting the rose-red islands,
      Painting the sand's wet gold,

    Down to their dreams of the sunset,
      Frail as a flower's white ghost,
    Lonely and lost she wandered
      Down to the darkening coast;
    Lost in the drifting midnight,
      Weeping, desolate, blind.
    Many went out to seek her:
      Never a heart could find.

    Yoichi Tenko, the painter,
      Plucked from his willow-tree
    Two big paper lanterns
      And ran to the brink of the sea;
    Over his head he held them,
      Crying, and only heard,
    Somewhere, out in the darkness,
      The cry of a wandering bird.


    VI

    Peonies, peonies thronged the May
    When in royal-rich array
      Came Sawara to the school
    Under the silvery willow-tree--
      To the school of Tenko!
    Silver bells on a milk-white mule,
      Rose-red sails on an emerald sea!
    Over the bloom of the cherry spray,
    Peonies, peonies dimmed the day;
    And he rode the royal way
      Back to Yoichi Tenko.

    Yoichi Tenko, half afraid,
    Whispered, "Wed some other maid;
      Kimi left me all alone
    Under the silvery willow-tree,
      Left me," whispered Tenko,
    "Kimi had a heart of stone!"--
      "Kimi, Kimi? Who is she?
    Kimi? Ah--the child that played
    Round the willow-tree. She prayed
    Often; and, whate'er I said,
      She believed it, Tenko."

    He had come to paint anew
    Those dim isles of rose and blue,
      For a palace far away,
    Under the silvery willow-tree--
      So he said to Tenko;
    And he painted, day by day,
      Golden visions of the sea.
    No, he had not come to woo;
    Yet, had Kimi proven true,
    Doubtless he had loved her too,
      Hardly less than Tenko.

    Since the thought was in his head,
    He would make his choice and wed;
      And a lovely maid he chose
    Under the silvery willow-tree.
      "Fairer far," said Tenko.
    "Kimi had a twisted nose,
      And a foot too small, for me,
    And her face was dull as lead!"
    "Nay, a flower, be it white or red,
    _Is_ a flower," Sawara said!
      "So it is," said Tenko.


    VII

    Great Sawara, the painter,
      Sought, on a day of days,
    One of the peacock islands
      Out in the sunset haze:
    Rose-red sails on the water
      Carried him quickly nigh;
    There would he paint him a wonder
      Worthy of Hokusai.

    Lo, as he leapt o'er the creaming
      Roses of faery foam,
    Out of the green-lipped caverns
      Under the isle's blue dome,
    White as a drifting snow-flake,
      White as the moon's white flame,
    White as a ghost from the darkness,
      Little O Kimi came.

    "Long I have waited, Sawara,
      Here in our sunset isle,
    Sawara, Sawara, Sawara,
      Look on me once, and smile;
    Face I have watched so long for,
      Hands I have longed to hold,
    Sawara, Sawara, Sawara,
      Why is your heart so cold?"

    Surely, he thought, I have painted
      Nothing so fair as this
    Moonlit almond blossom
      Sweet to fold and kiss....
    "Kimi," he said, "I am wedded!
      Hush, for it could not be!"
    "Kiss me one kiss," she whispered,
      "Me also, even me."

    Small and terribly drifting
      Backward, her sad white face
    Lifted up to Sawara
      Once, in that lonely place,
    White as a drifting blossom
      Under his wondering eyes,
    Slowly he gathered and held her
      Under the drifting skies.

    "Others are happy," she whispered,
      "Maidens and men I have seen:
    Be happy, be happy, Sawara!
      The other--shall be--your queen!
    Kiss me one kiss for parting."
      Trembling she lifted her head,
    Then like a broken blossom
      It fell on his arm. She was dead.


    VIII

    Much impressed, Sawara straight
    (Though the hour was growing late)
      Made a sketch of Kimi lying
    By the lonely, sighing sea,
      Brought it back to Tenko.
    Tenko looked it over crying
      (Under the silvery willow-tree).
    "You have burst the golden gate!
    You have conquered Time and Fate!
    Hokusai is not so great!
      This is Art," said Tenko!



THE ENCHANTED ISLAND


    I

    I remember--
                a breath, a breath
      Blown thro' the rosy gates of birth,
      A morning freshness not of the earth
    But cool and strange and lovely as death
      In Paradise, in Paradise,
    When, all to suffer the old sweet pain
      Closing his immortal eyes
      Wonder-wild an angel lies
    With wings of rainbow-tinctured grain
      Withering till--ah, wonder-wild,
    Here on the dawning earth again
      He wakes, a little child.


    II

    I remember--
                a gleam, a gleam
      Of sparkling waves and warm blue sky
    Far away and long ago,
      Or ever I knew that youth could die;
    And out of the dawn, the dawn, the dawn,
    Into the unknown life we sailed
      As out of sleep into a dream,
    And, as with elfin cables drawn
      In dusk of purple over the glowing
    Wrinkled measureless emerald sea,
    The light cloud shadows larger far
    Than the sweet shapes which drew them on,
    Elfin exquisite shadows flowing
    Between us and the morning star
    Chased us all a summer's day,
    And our sail like a dew-lit blossom shone
    Till, over a rainbow haze of spray
    That arched a reef of surf like snow
      --Far away and long ago--
    We saw the sky-line rosily engrailed
      With tufted peaks above a smooth lagoon
    Which growing, growing, growing as we sailed
      Curved all around them like a crescent moon;
    And then we saw the purple-shadowed creeks,
    The feathery palms, the gleaming golden streaks
    Of sand, and nearer yet, like jewels of fire
    Streaming between the boughs, or floating higher
    Like tiny sunset-clouds in noon-day skies,
      The birds of Paradise.


    III

    The island floated in the air,
      Its image floated in the sea:
    Which was the shadow? Both were fair:
      Like sister souls they seemed to be;
    And one was dreaming and asleep,
      And one bent down from Paradise
    To kiss with radiance in the deep
      The darkling lips and eyes.

    And, mingling softly in their dreams,
      That holy kiss of sea and sky
    Transfused the shadows and the gleams
      Of Time and of Eternity:
    The dusky face looked up and gave
      To heaven its golden shadowed calm;
    The face of light fulfilled the wave
      With blissful wings and fans of palm.

    Above, the tufted rosy peaks
      That melted in the warm blue skies,
    Below, the purple-shadowed creeks
      That glassed the birds of Paradise--
    A bridal knot, it hung in heaven;
      And, all around, the still lagoon
    From bloom of dawn to blush of even
      Curved like a crescent moon.

    And there we wandered evermore
      Thro' boyhood's everlasting years,
    Listening the murmur of the shore
      As one that lifts a shell and hears
    The murmur of forgotten seas
      Around some lost Broceliande,
    The sigh of sweet Eternities
      That turn the world to fairy-land,

    That turned our isle to a single pearl
      Glowing in measureless waves of wine!
    Above, below, the clouds would curl,
      Above, below, the stars would shine
    In sky and sea.   We hung in heaven!
      Time and space were but elfin-sweet
    Rock-bound pools for the dawn and even
      To wade with their rosy feet.

    Our pirate cavern faced the West:
      We closed its door with screens of palm,
    While some went out to seek the nest
      Wherein the Phoenix, breathing balm,
    Burns and dies to live for ever
      (How should we dream we lived to die?)
    And some would fish in the purple river
      That thro' the hills brought down the sky.

    And some would dive in the lagoon
      Like sunbeams, and all round our isle
    Swim thro' the lovely crescent moon,
      Glimpsing, for breathless mile on mile,
    The wild sea-woods that bloomed below,
      The rainbow fish, the coral cave
    Where vanishing swift as melting snow
      A mermaid's arm would wave.

    Then dashing shoreward thro' the spray
      On sun-lit sands they cast them down,
    Or in the white sea-daisies lay
      With sun-stained bodies rosy-brown,
    Content to watch the foam-bows flee
      Across the shelving reefs and bars,
    With wild eyes gazing out to sea
      Like happy haunted stars.


    IV

    And O, the wild sea-maiden
      Drifting through the starlit air,
    With white arms blossom-laden
      And the sea-scents in her hair:
    Sometimes we heard her singing
      The midnight forest through,
    Or saw a soft hand flinging
      Blossoms drenched with starry dew
    Into the dreaming purple cave;
      And, sometimes, far and far away
    Beheld across the glooming wave
      Beyond the dark lagoon,
    Beyond the silvery foaming bar,
      The black bright rock whereon she lay
    Like a honey-coloured star
      Singing to the breathless moon,
    Singing in the silent night
    Till the stars for sheer delight
    Closed their eyes, and drowsy birds
    In the midmost forest spray
    Took their heads from out their wings,
    Thinking--it is Ariel sings
    And we must catch the witching words
      And sing them o'er by day.


    V

    And then, there came a breath, a breath
    Cool and strange and dark as death,
    A stealing shadow, not of the earth
    But fresh and wonder-wild as birth.
    I know not when the hour began
    That changed the child's heart in the man,
    Or when the colours began to wane,
    But all our roseate island lay
    Stricken, as when an angel dies
    With wings of rainbow-tinctured grain
    Withering, and his radiant eyes
    Closing. Pitiless walls of grey
    Gathered around us, a growing tomb
    From which it seemed not death or doom
        Could roll the stone away.


    VI

    Yet--I remember--
                    a gleam, a gleam,
      (Or ever I dreamed that youth could die!)
      Of sparkling waves and warm blue sky
    As out of sleep into a dream,
      Wonder-wild for the old sweet pain,
      We sailed into that unknown sea
      Through the gates of Eternity.

    Peacefully close your mortal eyes
      For ye shall wake to it again
    In Paradise, in Paradise.




UNITY


    I

    Heart of my heart, the world is young;
      Love lies hidden in every rose!
    Every song that the skylark sung
      Once, we thought, must come to a close:
    Now we know the spirit of song,
      Song that is merged in the chant of the whole,
    Hand in hand as we wander along,
      What should we doubt of the years that roll?


    II

    Heart of my heart, we cannot die!
      Love triumphant in flower and tree,
    Every life that laughs at the sky
      Tells us nothing can cease to be:
    One, we are one with a song to-day,
      One with the clover that scents the wold,
    One with the Unknown, far away,
      One with the stars, when earth grows old.


    III

    Heart of my heart, we are one with the wind,
      One with the clouds that are whirled o'er the lea,
    One in many, O broken and blind,
      One as the waves are at one with the sea!
    Ay! when life seems scattered apart,
      Darkens, ends as a tale that is told,
    One, we are one, O heart of my heart,
      One, still one, while the world grows old.




THE HILL-FLOWER


    _It is my faith that every flower
      Enjoys the air it breathes_--
    So was it sung one golden hour
      Among the woodbine wreaths;
    And yet, though wet with living dew,
    The song seemed far more sweet than true.

    Blind creatures of the sun and air
      I dreamed it but a dream
    That, like Narcissus, would confer
      With self in every stream,
    And to the leaves and boughs impart
    The tremors of a human heart.

    To-day a golden pinion stirred
      The world's Bethesda pool,
    And I believed the song I heard
      Nor put my heart to school;
    And through the rainbows of the dream
    I saw the gates of Eden gleam.

    The rain had ceased.   The great hills rolled
      In silence to the deep:
    The gorse in waves of green and gold
      Perfumed their lonely sleep;
    And, at my feet, one elfin flower
    Drooped, blind with glories of the shower.

    I stooped--a giant from the sky--
      Above its piteous shield,
    And, suddenly, the dream went by,
      And there--was heaven revealed!
    I stooped to pluck it; but my hand
    Paused, mid-way, o'er its fairyland.

    Not of mine own was that strange voice,
      "Pluck--tear a star from heaven!"
    Mine only was the awful choice
      To scoff and be forgiven
    Or hear the very grass I trod
    Whispering the gentle thoughts of God.

    I know not if the hill-flower's place
      Beneath that mighty sky,
    Its lonely and aspiring grace,
      Its beauty born to die,
    Touched me, I know it seemed to be
    Cherished by all Eternity.

    Man, doomed to crush at every stride
      A hundred lives like this
    Which by their weakness were allied,
      If by naught else, to his,
    Can only for a flash discern
    What passion through the whole doth yearn.

    Not into words can I distil
      The pity or the pain
    Which hallowing all that lonely hill
      Cried out "Refrain, refrain,"
    Then breathed from earth and sky and sea,
    "Herein you did it unto Me."

    Somewhile that hill was heaven's own breast,
      The flower its joy and grief,
    Hugged close and fostered and caressed
      In every brief bright leaf:
    And, ere I went thro' sun and dew,
    I leant and gently touched it, too.




ACTÆON

    "Who stood beside the naked Swift-footed
    And bound his forehead with Proserpine's hair."

              --BROWNING (_Pauline_)


    I

    _Light of beauty, O, "perfect in whiteness,"
      Softly suffused thro' the world's dark shrouds,
    Kindling them all as they pass by thy brightness,--
      Hills, men, cities,--a pageant of clouds,
    Thou to whom Life and Time surrender
      All earth's forms as to heaven's deep care,
    Who shall pierce to thy naked splendour,
      Bind his brows with thy hair?_


    II

    Swift thro' the sprays when Spring grew bolder
      Young Actæon swept to the chase!
    Golden the fawn-skin, back from the shoulder
      Flowing, set free the limbs' lithe grace,
    Muscles of satin that rippled like sunny
      Streams--a hunter, a young athlete,
    Scattering dews and crushing out honey
      Under his sandalled feet.


    III

    Sunset softened the crags of the mountain,
      Silence melted the hunter's heart,
    Only the sob of a falling fountain
      Pulsed in a deep ravine apart:
    All the forest seemed waiting breathless,
      Eager to whisper the dying day
    Some rich word that should utter the deathless
      Secret of youth and May.


    IV

    Down, as to May thro' the flowers that attend her,
      Slowly, on tip-toe, down the ravine
    Fair as the sun-god, poising a slender
      Spear like a moon-shaft silver and green,
    Stole he! Ah, did the oak-wood ponder
      Youth's glad dream in its heart of gloom?
    Dryad or fawn was it started yonder?
      Ah, what whisper of doom?


    V

    Gold, thro' the ferns as he gazed and listened,
      Shone the soul of the wood's deep dream,
    One bright glade and a pool that glistened
      Full in the face of the sun's last gleam,--
    Gold in the heart of a violet dingle!
      Young Actæon, beware! beware!
    Who shall track, while the pulses tingle,
      Spring to her woodland lair?


    VI

    See, at his feet, what mystical quiver,
      Maiden's girdle and robe of snow,
    Tossed aside by the green glen-river
      Ere she bathed in the pool below?
    All the fragrance of April meets him
      Full in the face with its young sweet breath;
    Yet, as he steals to the glade, there greets him--
      Hush, what whisper of death?


    VII

    Lo, in the violets, lazily dreaming,
      Young Diana, the huntress, lies:
    One white side thro' the violets gleaming
      Heaves and sinks with her golden sighs,
    One white breast like a diamond crownet
      Couched in a velvet casket glows,
    One white arm, tho' the violets drown it,
      Thrills their purple with rose.


    VIII

    Buried in fragrance, the half-moon flashes,
      Beautiful, clouded, from head to heel:
    One white foot in the warm wave plashes,
      Violets tremble and half reveal,
    Half conceal, as they kiss, the slender
      Slope and curve of her sleeping limbs:
    Violets bury one half the splendour
      Still, as thro' heaven, she swims.


    IX

    Cold as the white rose waking at daybreak
      Lifts the light of her lovely face,
    Poised on an arm she watches the spray break
      Over the slim white ankle's grace,
    Watches the wave that sleeplessly tosses
      Kissing the pure foot's pink sea-shells,
    Watches the long-leaved heaven-dark mosses
      Drowning their star-bright bells.


    X

    Swift as the Spring where the South has brightened
      Earth with bloom in one passionate night,
    Swift as the violet heavens had lightened
      Swift to perfection, blinding, white,
    Dian arose: and Actæon saw her,
      Only he since the world began!
    Only in dreams could Endymion draw her
      Down to the heart of man.


    XI

    Fair as the dawn upon Himalaya
      Anger flashed from her cheek's pure rose,
    Alpine peaks at the passage of Maia
      Flushed not fair as her breasts' white snows.
    Ah, fair form of the heaven's completeness,
      Who shall sing thee or who shall say
    Whence that "high perfection of sweetness,"
      Perfect to save or slay?


    XII

    _Perfect in beauty, beauty the portal
      Here on earth to the world's deep shrine,
    Beauty hidden in all things mortal,
      Who shall mingle his eyes with thine?
    Thou, to whom Life and Death surrender
      All earth's forms as to heaven's deep care,
    Who shall pierce to thy naked splendour,
      Bind his brows with thy hair?_


    XIII

    _Beauty, perfect in blinding whiteness,
      Softly suffused thro' the world's dark shrouds,
    Kindling them all as they pass by her brightness,--
      Hills, men, cities,--a pageant of clouds,
    She, the unchanging, shepherds their changes,
      Bids them mingle and form and flow,
    Flowers and flocks and the great hill-ranges
      Follow her cry and go._


    XIV

    Swift as the sweet June lightning flashes,
      Down she stoops to the purpling pool,
    Sudden and swift her white hand dashes
      Rainbow mists in his eyes! "Ah, fool!
    Hunter," she cries to the young Actæon,
      "Change to the hunted, rise and fly,
    Swift ere the wild pack utter its pæan,
      Swift for thy hounds draw nigh!"


    XV

    Lo, as he trembles, the greenwood branches
      Dusk his brows with their antlered pride!
    Lo, as a stag thrown back on its haunches
      Quivers, with velvet nostrils wide,
    Lo, he changes! The soft fur darkens
      Down to the fetlock's lifted fear!--
    Hounds are baying!--he snuffs and hearkens,
      "Fly, for the stag is here!"


    XVI

    Swift as he leapt thro' the ferns, Actæon,
      Young Actæon, the lordly stag,
    Full and mellow the deep-mouthed pæan
      Swelled behind him from crag to crag:
    Well he remembered that sweet throat leading,
      Wild with terror he raced and strained,
    On thro' the darkness, thorn-swept, bleeding:
      Ever they gained and gained!


    XVII

    Death, like a darkling huntsman holloed--
      Swift, Actæon!--desire and shame
    Leading the pack of the passions followed.
      Red jaws frothing with white-hot flame,
    Volleying out of the glen, they leapt up,
      Snapped and fell short of the foam-flecked thighs ...
    Inch by terrible inch they crept up,
      Shadows with blood-shot eyes.


    XVIII

    Still with his great heart bursting asunder
      Still thro' the night he struggled and bled;
    Suddenly round him the pack's low thunder
      Surged, the hounds that his own hand fed
    Fastened in his throat, with red jaws drinking
      Deep!--for a moment his antlered pride
    Soared o'er their passionate seas, then, sinking,
      Fell for the fangs to divide.


    XIX

    _Light of beauty, O, perfect in whiteness,
      Softly suffused thro' the years' dark veils,
    Kindling them all as they pass by her brightness,
      Filling our hearts with her old-world tales,
    She, the unchanging, shepherds their changes,
      Bids them mingle and form and flow,
    Flowers and flocks and the great hill-ranges
      Follow her cry and go._


    XX

    Still, in the violets, lazily dreaming
      Young Diana, the huntress, lies:
    One white side thro' the violets gleaming
      Heaves and sinks with her golden sighs;
    One white breast like a diamond crownet
      Couched in a velvet casket glows,
    One white arm, tho' the violets drown it,
      Thrills their purple with rose.




LUCIFER'S FEAST

(A EUROPEAN NIGHTMARE.)


    To celebrate the ascent of man, one gorgeous night
    Lucifer gave a feast.
                          Its world-bewildering light
    Danced in Belshazzar's tomb, and the old kings dead and gone
    Felt their dust creep to jewels in crumbling Babylon.

    Two nations were His guests--the top and flower of Time,
    The fore-front of an age which now had learned to climb
    The slopes where Newton knelt, the heights that Shakespeare trod,
    The mountains whence Beethoven rolled the voice of God.

    Lucifer's feasting-lamps were like the morning stars,
    But at the board-head shone the blood-red lamp of Mars.

    League upon glittering league, white front and flabby face
    Bent o'er the groaning board. Twelve brave men droned the grace;
    But with instinctive tact, in courtesy to their Host,
    Omitted God the Son and God the Holy Ghost,
    And to the God of Battles raised their humble prayers.
    Then, then, like thunder, all the guests drew up their chairs.
    By each a drinking-cup, yellow, almost, as gold.
    (_The blue eye-sockets gave the thumbs a good firm hold_)
    Adorned the flowery board. Could even brave men shrink?

    Why if the cups _were_ skulls, they had red wine to drink!
    And had not each a napkin, white and peaked and proud,
    Waiting to wipe his mouth? A napkin? Nay, a shroud!
    This was a giant's feast, on hell's imperial scale.
    The blades glistened.

                          The shrouds--O, in one snowy gale,
    The pink hands fluttered them out, and spread them on their knees.
    Who knew what gouts might drop, what filthy flakes of grease,
    Now that o'er every shoulder, through the coiling steam,
    Inhuman faces peered, with wolfish eyes a-gleam,
    And grey-faced vampire Lusts that whinneyed in each ear
    Hints of the hideous courses?

                                 None may name them here?
    None? And we may not see! The distant cauldrons cloak
    The lava-coloured plains with clouds of umber smoke.
    Nay, by that shrapnel-light, by those wild shooting stars
    That rip the clouds away with fiercer fire than Mars,
    They are painted sharp as death. If these can eat and drink
    Chatter and laugh and rattle their knives, why should we shrink
    From empty names? We know those ghastly gleams are true:
    Why should Christ cry again--_They know not what they do?_
    They, heirs of all the ages, sons of Shakespeare's land,
    They, brothers of Beethoven, smiling, cultured, bland,
    Whisper with sidling heads to ghouls with bloody lips.

    Each takes upon his plate a small round thing that drips
    And quivers, a child's heart.

                                  Miles on miles
    The glittering table bends o'er that first course, and smiles;
    For, through the wreaths of smoke, the grey Lusts bear aloft
    The second course, on leaden chargers, large and soft,
    Bodies of women, steaming in an opal mist,
    Red-branded here and there where vampire-teeth have kissed.

    But white as pig's flesh, newly killed, and cleanly dressed,
    A lemon in each mouth and roses round each breast,
    Emblems to show how deeply, sweetly satisfied,
    The breasts, the lips, can sleep, whose children fought and died
    For--what? For country? God, once more Thy shrapnel-light!

    Let those dark slaughter-houses burst upon our sight,
    These kitchens are too clean, too near the tiring room!
    Let Thy white shrapnel rend those filthier veils of gloom,
    Rip the last fogs away and strip the foul thing bare!
    One lightning-picture--see--yon bayonet-bristling square
    Mown down, mown down, mown down, wild swathes of crimson wheat,
    The white-eyed charge, the blast, the terrible retreat,
    The blood-greased wheels of cannon thundering into line
    O'er that red writhe of pain, rent groin and shattered spine,
    The moaning faceless face that kissed its child last night,
    The raw pulp of the heart that beat for love's delight,
    The heap of twisting bodies, clotted and congealed
    In one red huddle of anguish on the loathsome field,
    The seas of obscene slaughter spewing their blood-red yeast,
    Multitudes pouring out their entrails for the feast,
    Knowing not why, but dying, they think, for some high cause,
    Dying for "hearth and home," their flags, their creeds, their laws.
    Ask of the Bulls and Bears, ask if they understand
    How both great grappling armies bleed for their own land;
    For in that faith they die! These hoodwinked thousands die
    Simply as heroes, gulled by hell's profoundest lie.
    Who keeps the slaughter-house? Not these, not these who gain
    Nought but the sergeant's shilling and the homeless pain!
    Who pulls the ropes? Not these, who buy their crust of bread
    With the salt sweat of labour! These but bury their dead
    Then sweat again for food!

                        Christ, is the hour not come,
    To send forth one great voice and strike this dark hell dumb,
    A voice to out-crash the cannon, one united cry
    To sweep these wild-beast standards down that stain the sky,

    To hurl these Lions and Bears and Eagles to their doom,
    One voice, one heart, one soul, one fire that shall consume
    The last red reeking shreds that flicker against the blast
    And purge the Augean stalls we call "our glorious past"!
    One voice from dawn and sunset, one almighty voice,
    Full-throated as the sea--ye sons o' the earth, rejoice!
    Beneath the all-loving sky, confederate kings ye stand,
    Fling open wide the gates o' the world-wide Fatherland.

       *   *   *   *

    Poor fools, we dare not dream it! We that pule and whine
    Of art and science, we, whose great souls leave no shrine
    Unshattered, we that climb the Sinai Shakespeare trod,
    The Olivets where Beethoven walked and talked with God,
    We that have weighed the stars and reined the lightning, we
    That stare thro' heaven and plant our footsteps in the sea,
    We whose great souls have risen so far above the creeds
    That we can jest at Christ and leave Him where He bleeds,
    A legend of the dark, a tale so false or true
    That howsoe'er we jest at Him, the jest sounds new.
    (Our weariest dinner-tables never tire of that!
    Let the clown sport with Christ, never the jest falls flat!)
    Poor fools, we dare not dream a dream so strange, so great,
    As on this ball of dust to found one "world-wide state,"
    To float one common flag above our little lands,
    And ere our little sun grows cold to clasp our hands
    In friendship for a moment!

       *   *   *   *

                         Hark, the violins
    Are swooning through the mist. The great blue band begins,
    Playing, in dainty scorn, a hymn we used to know,
    How long was it, ten thousand thousand years ago?

    _There is a green hill far away
      Beside a City wall!_--
    And O, the music swung a-stray
      With a solemn dying fall;
    For it was a pleasant jest to play
      Hymns in the Devil's Hall.

    And yet, and yet, if aught be true,
      This dream we left behind,
    This childish Christ, be-mocked anew
      To please the men of mind,
    Yet hung so far beyond the flight
      Of our most lofty thought
    That--Lucifer laughed _at_ us that night.
      Not _with_ us, as he ought.

    Beneath the blood-red lamp of Mars,
      Cloaked with a scarlet cloud
    He gazed along the line of stars
      Above the guzzling crowd:
    Sinister, thunder-scarred, he raised
      His great world-wandering eyes,
    And on some distant vision gazed
      Beyond our cloudy skies.

    "_Poor bats_," he sneered, "_their jungle-dark
      Civilisation's noon!
    Poor wolves, that hunt in packs and bark
      Beneath the grinning moon;
    Poor fools, that cast the cross away,
      Before they break the sword;
    Poor sots, who take the night for day;
      Have mercy on me, Lord._

    "_Beyond their wisdom's deepest skies
      I see Thee hanging yet,
    The love still hungering in Thine eyes,
      Thy plaited crown still wet!
    Thine arms outstretched to fold them all
      Beneath Thy sheltering breast;
    But--since they will not hear Thy call,
      Lord, I forbear to jest._

    "_Lord, I forbear! The day I fell
      I fell at least thro' pride!
    Rather than these should share my hell
      Take me, thou Crucified!
    O, let me share Thy cross of grief,
      And let me work Thy will,
    As morning star, or dying thief.
      Thy fallen angel still._

    "_Lord, I forbear! For Thee, at least,
      In pain so like to mine,
    The mighty meaning of their feast
      Is plain as bread and wine:
    O, smile once more, far off, alone!
      Since these nor hear nor see,
    From my deep hell, so like Thine own,
      Lord Christ, I pity Thee._"

    Yet once again, he thought, they shall be fully tried,
    If they be devils or fools too light for hell's deep pride.

    The champ of teeth was over, and the reeking room
    Gaped for the speeches now. Across the sulphurous fume
    Lucifer gave a sign. The guests stood thundering up!
    "Gentlemen, charge your glasses!"
                        Every yellow cup
    Frothed with the crimson blood. They brandished them on high!
    "Gentlemen, drink to those who fight and know not why!"

    And in the bubbling blood each nose was buried deep.
    "Gentlemen, drink to those who sowed that we might reap!
    Drink to the pomp, pride, circumstance, of glorious war,
    The grand self-sacrifice that made us what we are!
    And drink to the peace-lovers who believe that peace
    Is War, red, bloody War; for War can never cease
    Unless we drain the veins of peace to fatten WAR!
    Gentlemen, drink to the brains that made us what we are!
    Drink to self-sacrifice that helps us all to shake
    The world with tramp of armies. Germany, awake!
    England, awake! Shakespeare's, Beethoven's Fatherland,
    Are you not both aware, do you not understand,
    Self-sacrifice is competition? It is the law
    Of Life, and so, though both of you are wholly right,
    Self-sacrifice requires that both of you should fight."
    And "Hoch! hoch! hoch!" they cried; and "Hip, hip, hip, Hurrah!"

    This raised the gorge of Lucifer. With one deep "Bah,"
    Above those croaking toads he towered like Gabriel;

    Then straightway left the table and went home to hell.



VETERANS

(WRITTEN FOR THE RELIEF FUND OF THE CRIMEAN VETERANS.)


    I

    When the last charge sounds
      And the battle thunders o'er the plain,
    Thunders o'er the trenches where the red streams flow,
      Will it not be well with us,
                      Veterans, veterans,
    If, beneath your torn old flag, we burst upon the foe?


    II

    When the last post sounds
      And the night is on the battle-field,
    Night and rest at last from all the tumult of our wars,
      Will it not be well with us,
                        Veterans, veterans,
    If, with duty done like yours, we lie beneath the stars?


    III

    When the great reveille sounds
      For the terrible last Sabaoth,
    All the legions of the dead shall hear the trumpet ring!
      Will it not be well with us,
                        Veterans, veterans,
    If, beneath your torn old flag, we rise to meet our King?




THE QUEST RENEWED


    It is too soon, too soon, though time be brief,
      Quite to forswear thy quest,
    O Light, whose farewell dyes the falling leaf,
      Fades thro' the fading west.

    Thou'rt flown too soon! I stretch my hands out still,
      O, Light of Life, to Thee,
    Who leav'st an Olivet in each far blue hill,
      A sorrow on every sea.

    It is too soon, here while the loud world roars
      For wealth and power and fame,
    Too soon quite to forget those other shores
      Afar, from whence I came;

    Too soon even to forget the first dear dream
      Dreamed far away, when tears could freely flow;
    And life seemed infinite, as that sky's great gleam
      Deepened, to which I go;

    Too soon even to forget the fluttering fire
      And those old books beside the friendly hearth,
    When time seemed endless as my own desire,
      And angels walked our earth;

    Too soon quite to forget amid the throng
      What once the silent hills, the sounding beach
    Taught me--where singing was the prize of song,
      And heaven within my reach.

    It is too soon amid the cynic sneers,
      The sophist smiles, the greedy mouths and hands,
    Quite to forget the light of those dead years
      And my lost mountain-lands;

    Too soon to lose that everlasting hope
      (For so it seemed) of youth in love's pure reign,
    Though while I linger on this darkening slope
      Nought seems quite worth the pain.

    It is too soon for me to break that trust,
      O, Light of Light, flown far past sun and moon,
    Burn back thro' this dark panoply of dust;
      Or let me follow--soon.




THE LIGHTS OF HOME


    Pilot, how far from home?--
      Not far, not far to-night,
      A flight of spray, a sea-bird's flight,
    A flight of tossing foam,
      And then the lights of home!--

    And, yet again, how far?
      And seems the way so brief?
      Those lights beyond the roaring reef
    Were lights of moon and star,
      Far, far, none knows how far!

    Pilot, how far from home?--
      The great stars pass away
      Before Him as a flight of spray,
    Moons as a flight of foam!
      I see the lights of home.




NEW POEMS


'TWEEN THE LIGHTS

    "The Nine men's morrice is filled up with mud ...
    From our debate, from our dissension."

                  --SHAKESPEARE


    I

    Fairies, come back! We have not seen
    Your dusky foot-prints on the green
    This many a year. No frolic now
    Shakes the dew from the hawthorn-bough.
    Never a man and never a maid
    Spies you in the blue-bell shade;
    Yet, where the nine men's morrice stood,
    Our spades are clearing out the mud.

    _Chorus._--_Come, little irised heralds, fling
              Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
              The bright eyes and the cordial hand
              Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    II

    Fairies, come back!   Our pomp of gold,
    Our blazing noon, grows grey and old;
    The scornful glittering ages wane:
    Forgive, forget, come back again.
    This is our England's Hallowe'en!
    Come, trip it, trip it o'er the green,
    Trip it, amidst the roaring mart,
    In the still meadows of the heart.

       _Come, little irised heralds, fling
        Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
        The bright eyes and the cordial hand
        Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    III

    Fairies, come back! Once more the gleams
    Of your lost Eden haunt our dreams,
    Where Evil, at the touch of Good,
    Withers in the Enchanted Wood:
    Fairies, come back! Drive gaunt Despair
    And Famine to their ghoulish lair!
    Tap at each heart's bright window-pane
    Thro' merry England once again.

       _Come, little irised heralds, fling
        Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
        The bright eyes and the cordial hand
        Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    IV

    Fairies, come back! And, if you bring
    That long-expected song to sing,
    Ciss needs not, ere she welcomes you,
    To find a sixpence in her shoe!
    If, of the mud he clears away,
    Tom bears the ignoble stain to-day,
    Come back, and he will not forget
    The heavens that yearn beyond us yet.

       _Come, little irised heralds, fling
        Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
        The bright eyes and the cordial hand
        Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    V

    Yet, if for this you will not come,
    Your friends, the children, call you home,
    Fairies, they wear no May-day crowns,
    Your playmates in those grim black towns
    Look, fairies, how they peak and pine,
    How hungrily their great eyes shine!
    From fevered alley and foetid lane
    Plead the thin arms--_Come back again!_

      _Come, little irised heralds, fling
      Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
      The bright eyes and the cordial hand
      Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    VI

    We have named the stars and weighed the moon,
    Counted our gains and ... lost the boon,
    If _this_ be the end of all our lore--
    To draw the blind and close the door!
    O, lift the latch, slip in between
    The things which we have heard and seen,
    Slip thro' the fringes of the blind
    Into the souls of all mankind.

      _Come, little irised heralds, fling
      Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
      The bright eyes and the cordial hand
      Of brotherhood thro' all our land._


    VII

    Fairies, come back! Our wisdom dies
    Beneath your deeper, starrier skies!
    We have reined the lightning, probed the flower:
    Bless, as of old, our twilight hour!
    Bring dreams, and let the dreams be true,
    Bring hope that makes each heart anew,
    Bring love that knits all hearts in one;
    Then--sing of heaven and bring the sun!

      _Come, little irised heralds, fling
      Earth's Eden-gates apart, and sing
      The bright eyes and the cordial hand
      Of brotherhood thro' all our land._




CREATION


    In the beginning, there was nought
      But heaven, one Majesty of Light,
    Beyond all speech, beyond all thought,
      Beyond all depth, beyond all height,
    Consummate heaven, the first and last,
      Enfolding in its perfect prime
    No future rushing to the past,
      But one rapt Now, that knew not Space or Time.

    Formless it was, being gold on gold,
      And void--but with that complete Life
    Where music could no wings unfold
      Till lo, God smote the strings of strife!
    "Myself unto Myself am Throne,
      Myself unto Myself am Thrall
    I that am All am all alone,"
      He said, "Yea, I have nothing, having all."

    And, gathering round His mount of bliss
      The angel-squadrons of His will,
    He said, "One battle yet there is
      To win, one vision to fulfil!
    Since heaven where'er I gaze expands,
      And power that knows no strife or cry,
    Weakness shall bind and pierce My hands
      And make a world for Me wherein to die.

    "All might, all vastness and all glory
      Being Mine, I must descend and make
    Out of My heart a song, a story
      Of little hearts that burn and break;
    Out of My passion without end
      I will make little azure seas,
    And into small sad fields descend
      And make green grass, white daisies, rustling trees."

    Then shrank His angels, knowing He thrust
      His arms out East and West and gave
    For every little dream of dust
      Part of His life as to a grave!
    "_Enough, O Father, for Thy words
      Have pierced Thy hands!_" But, low and sweet,
    He said "Sunsets and streams and birds,
      And drifting clouds!"--The purple stained His feet.--

    "Enough!" His angels moaned in fear,
      "_Father, Thy words have pierced Thy side!_"
    He whispered, "Roses shall grow there,
      And there must be a hawthorn-tide,
    And ferns, dewy at dawn," and still
      They moaned--"_Enough, the red drops bleed!_"
    "And," sweet and low, "on every hill,"
      He said, "I will have flocks and lambs to lead."

    His angels bowed their heads beneath
      Their wings till that great pang was gone:
    "_Pour not Thy soul out unto Death!_"
      They moaned, and still His Love flowed on,
    "There shall be small white wings to stray
      From bliss to bliss, from bloom to bloom,
    And blue flowers in the wheat;" and--"_Stay!
      Speak not_," they cried, "_the word that seals Thy tomb!_"

    He spake--"I have thought of a little child
      That I will have there to embark
    On small adventures in the wild,
      And front slight perils in the dark;
    And I will hide from him and lure
      His laughing eyes with suns and moons,
    And rainbows that shall not endure;
      And--when he is weary, sing him drowsy tunes."

    His angels fell before Him weeping
      "_Enough! Tempt not the Gates of Hell!_"
    He said, "His soul is in his keeping
      That we may love each other well,
    And lest the dark too much affright him,
      I will strow countless little stars
    Across his childish skies to light him
      That he may wage in peace his mimic wars;

    "And oft forget Me as he plays
      With swords and childish merchandize,
    Or with his elfin balance weighs,
      Or with his foot-rule metes, the skies;
    Or builds his castles by the deep,
      Or tunnels through the rocks, and then--
    Turn to Me as he falls asleep,
      And, in his dreams, feel for My hand again.

    "And when he is older he shall be
      My friend and walk here at My side;
    Or--when he wills--grow young with Me,
      And, to that happy world where once we died
    Descending through the calm blue weather,
      Buy life once more with our immortal breath,
    And wander through the little fields together,
      And taste of Love and Death."




THE PEACEMAKER.


    Silently over his vast imperial seas,
      Over his sentinel fleets the Shadow swept
      And all his armies slept.
    There was but one quick challenge at the gate,
      Then--the cold menace of that out-stretched hand,
    Waving aside the panoplies of State,
    Brought the last faithful watchers to their knees,
      And lightning flashed the grief from land to land.

    Mourn, Britain, mourn, not for a king alone!
    This was the people's king! His purple throne
      Was in their hearts. They shared it. Millions of swords
    Could not have shaken it! Sharers of this doom,
    This democratic doom which all men know,
    His Common-weal, in this great common woe,
      Veiling its head in the universal gloom,
    With that majestic grief which knows not words,
      Bows o'er a world-wide tomb.

    Mourn, Europe, for our England set this Crown
      In splendour past the reach of temporal power,
      Secure above the thunders of the hour,
    A sun in the great skies of her renown,
      A sun to hold her wheeling worlds in one
    By its own course of duty pre-ordained,
      Where'er the meteors flash and fall, a sun
    With its great course of duty!

                                   So he reigned,
      And died in its observance. Mightier he
    Than any despot, in his people's love,
    He served that law which rules the Thrones above,
      That world-wide law which by the raging sea
    Abased the flatterers of Canúte and makes
      The King that abnegates all lesser power
      A rock in time of trouble, and a tower
    Of strength where'er the tidal tempest breaks;
      That world-wide law whose name is harmony,
    Whose service perfect freedom!

                                   And _his_ name
    _The Peacemaker_, through all the future years
    Shall burn, a glorious and prophetic flame,
    A beaconing sun that never shall go down,
      A sun to speed the world's diviner morrow,
      A sun that shines the brighter for our sorrow;
    For, O, what splendour in a monarch's crown
      Vies with the splendour of his people's tears?

    And now, O now, while the sorrowful trumpet is blown,
    From island to continent, zone to imperial zone,
    And the flags of the nations are lowered in grief with our own;
    Now, while the roll of the drums that for battle were dumb
    When he reigned, salute his passing; and low on the breeze
    From the snow-bound North to the Australasian seas
    Surges the solemn lament--O, shall it not come,
    A glimpse of that mightier union of all mankind?
    Now, though our eyes, as they gaze on the vision, grow blind,
    Now, while the world is all one funeral knell,
    And the mournful cannon thunder his great farewell,
    Now, while the bells of a thousand cities toll,
    Remember, O England, remember the ageless goal,
    Rally the slumbering faith in the depths of thy soul,
    Lift up thine eyes to the Kingdom for which he fought,
    That Empire of Peace and Good-will, for which to his death-hour he wrought.
    Then, then while the pomp of the world seems a little thing,
      Ay, though by the world it be said,
        _The King is dead!_
    We shall lift up our hearts and answer--_Long live the King!_




THE SAILOR-KING


    The fleet, the fleet puts out to sea
      In a thunder of blinding foam to-night,
    With a bursting wreck-strewn reef to lee,
      But--a seaman fired yon beacon-light!
    Seamen hailing a seaman, know--
      Free-men crowning a free-man, sing--
    The worth of that light where the great ships go,
      The signal-fire of the king.

    Cloud and wind may shift and veer:
      This is steady and this is sure,
    A signal over our hope and fear,
      A pledge of the strength that shall endure--
    Having no part in our storm-tossed strife--
      A sign of union, which shall bring
    Knowledge to men of their close-knit life,
      The signal-fire of the king.

    His friends are the old grey glorious waves,
      The wide world round, the wide world round,
    That have roared with our guns and covered our graves
      From Nombre Dios to Plymouth Sound;
    And his crown shall shine, a central sun
      Round which the planet-nations sing,
    Going their ways, but linked in one,
      As the ships of our sailor-king.

    Many the ships, but a single fleet;
      Many the roads, but a single goal;
    And a light, a light where all roads meet,
      The beacon-fire of an Empire's soul;
    The worth of that light his seamen know,
      Through all the deaths that the storm can bring
    The crown of their comrade-ship a-glow,
      The signal-fire of the king.




THE FIDDLER'S FAREWELL


    With my fiddle to my shoulder,
      And my hair turning grey,
    And my heart growing older
      I must shuffle on my way!
    Tho' there's not a hearth to greet me
      I must reap as I sowed,
    And--the sunset shall meet me
      At the turn of the road.

    O, the whin's a dusky yellow
      And the road a rosy white,
    And the blackbird's call is mellow
      At the falling of night;
    And there's honey in the heather
      Where we'll make our last abode,
    My tunes and me together
      At the turn of the road.

    I have fiddled for your city
      Thro' market-place and inn!
    I have poured forth my pity
      On your sorrow and your sin!
    But your riches are your burden,
      And your pleasure is your goad!
    I've the whin-gold for guerdon
      At the turn of the road.

    Your village-lights 'll call me
      As the lights of home the dead;
    But a black night befall me
      Ere your pillows rest my head!
    God be praised, tho' like a jewel
      Every cottage casement showed,
    There's a star that's not so cruel
      At the turn of the road.

    Nay, beautiful and kindly
      Are the faces drawing nigh,
    But I gaze on them blindly
      And hasten, hasten by;
    For O, no face of wonder
      On earth has ever glowed
    Like the One that waits me yonder
      At the turn of the road.

    Her face is lit with splendour,
      She dwells beyond the skies;
    But deep, deep and tender
      Are the tears in her eyes:
    The angels see them glistening
      In pity for my load,
    And--she's waiting there, she's listening,
      At the turn of the road.




TO A PESSIMIST


    Life like a cruel mistress woos
      The passionate heart of man, you say,
    Only in mockery to refuse
      His love, at last, and turn away.

    To me she seems a queen that knows
      How great is love--but ah, how rare!--
    And, pointing heavenward ere she goes,
      Gives him the rose from out her hair.




MOUNT IDA

[This poem commemorates an event of some years ago, when a young
Englishman--still remembered by many of his contemporaries at
Oxford--went up into Mount Ida and was never seen again.]


    I

    Not cypress, but this warm pine-plumage now
      Fragrant with sap, I pluck; nor bid you weep,
    Ye Muses that still haunt the heavenly brow
      Of Ida, though the ascent is hard and steep:
    Weep not for him who left us wrapped in sleep
      At dawn beneath the holy mountain's breast
        And all alone from Ilion's gleaming shore
    Clomb the high sea-ward glens, fain to drink deep
      Of earth's old glory from your silent crest,
              Take the cloud-conquering throne
              Of gods, and gaze alone
    Thro' heaven. Darkling we slept who saw his face no more.


    II

    Ah yet, in him hath Lycidas a brother,
      And Adonaïs will not say him nay,
    And Thyrsis to the breast of one sweet Mother
      Welcomes him, climbing by the self-same way:
    Quietly as a cloud at break of day
      Up the long glens of golden dew he stole
        (And surely Bion called to him afar!)
    The tearful hyacinths and the greenwood spray
      Clinging to keep him from the sapphire goal,
              Kept of his path no trace!
              Upward the yearning face
    Clomb the ethereal height, calm as the morning star.


    III

    Ah yet, incline, dear Sisters, or my song
      That with the light wings of the skimming swallow
    Must range the reedy slopes, will work him wrong!
      And with some golden shaft do thou, Apollo,
    Show the pine-shadowed path that none may follow;
      For, as the blue air shuts behind a bird,
        Round him closed Ida's cloudy woods and rills!
    Day-long, night-long, by echoing height and hollow,
      We called him, but our tumult died unheard:
              Down from the scornful sky
              Our faint wing-broken cry
    Fluttered and perished among the many-folded hills.


    IV

    Ay, though we clomb each faint-flushed peak of vision,
      Nought but our own sad faces we divined:
    Thy radiant way still laughed us to derision,
      And still revengeful Echo proved unkind;
    And oft our faithless hearts half feared to find
      Thy cold corse in some dark mist-drenched ravine
        Where the white foam flashed headlong to the sea:
    How should we find thee, spirits deaf and blind
      Even to the things which we had heard and seen?
              Eyes that could see no more
              The old light on sea and shore,
    What should they hope or fear to find? They found not thee;


    V

    For thou wast ever alien to our skies,
      A wistful stray of radiance on this earth,
    A changeling with deep memories in thine eyes
      Mistily gazing thro' our loud-voiced mirth
    To some fair land beyond the gates of birth;
      Yet as a star thro' clouds, thou still didst shed
        Through our dark world thy lovelier, rarer glow;
    Time, like a picture of but little worth,
      Before thy young hand lifelessly outspread,
              At one light stroke from thee
              Gleamed with Eternity;
    Thou gav'st the master's touch, and we--we did not know.


    VI

    Not though we gazed from heaven o'er Ilion
      Dreaming on earth below, mistily crowned
    With towering memories, and beyond her shone
      The wine-dark seas Achilles heard resound!
    Only, and after many days, we found
      Dabbled with dew, at border of a wood
        Bedded in hyacinths, open and a-glow
    Thy Homer's Iliad.... Dryad tears had drowned
      The rough Greek type and, as with honey or blood,
              One crocus with crushed gold
              Stained the great page that told
    Of gods that sighed their loves on Ida, long ago.


    VII

    See--_for a couch to their ambrosial limbs
      Even as their golden load of splendour presses
    The fragrant thyme, a billowing cloud up-swims
      Of springing flowers beneath their deep caresses,
    Hyacinth, lotus, crocus, wildernesses
      Of bloom_ ... but clouds of sunlight and of dew
        Dropping rich balm, round the dark pine-woods curled
    That the warm wonder of their in-woven tresses,
      And all the secret blisses that they knew,
              Where beauty kisses truth
              In heaven's deep heart of youth,
    Might still be hidden, as thou art, from the heartless world.


    VIII

    Even as we found thy book, below these rocks
      Perchance that strange great eagle's feather lay,
    When Ganymede, from feeding of his flocks
      On Ida, vanished thro' the morning grey:
    Stranger it seemed, if thou couldst cast away
      Those golden musics as a thing of nought,
        A dream for which no longer thou hadst need!
    Ah, was it here then that the break of day
      Brought thee the substance for the shadow, taught
              Thy soul a swifter road
              To ease it of its load
    And watch this world of shadows as a dream recede?


    IX

    We slept! Darkling we slept! Our busy schemes,
      Our cold mechanic world awhile was still;
    But O, their eyes are blinded even in dreams
      Who from the heavenlier Powers withdraw their will:
    Here did the dawn with purer light fulfil
      Thy happier eyes than ours, here didst thou see
        The quivering wonder-light in flower and dew,
    The quickening glory of the haunted hill,
      The Hamadryad beckoning from the tree.
              The Naiad from the stream;
              While from her long dark dream
    Earth woke, trembling with life, light, beauty, through and through.


    X

    And the everlasting miracle of things
      Flowed round thee, and this dark earth opposed no bar,
    And radiant faces from the flowers and springs
      Dawned on thee, whispering, _Knowest thou whence_ we _are_?
    Faintly thou heardst us calling thee afar
      As Hylas heard, swooning beneath the wave,
        Girdled with glowing arms, while wood and glen
    Echoed his name beneath that rosy star;
      And thy farewell came faint as from the grave
              For very bliss; but we
              Could neither hear nor see;
    And all the hill with _Hylas! Hylas!_ rang again.


    XI

    But there were deeper love-tales for thine ears
      Than mellow-tongued Theocritus could tell:
    Over him like a sea two thousand years
      Had swept. They solemnized his music well!
    Farewell! What word could answer but farewell,
      From thee, O happy spirit, that couldst steal
        So quietly from this world at break of day?
    What voice of ours could break the silent spell
      Beauty had cast upon thee, or reveal
              The gates of sun and dew
              Which oped and let thee through
    And led thee heavenward by that deep enchanted way?


    XII

    Yet here thou mad'st thy choice: Love, Wisdom, Power,
      As once before young Paris, they stood here!
    Beneath them Ida, like one full-blown flower,
      Shed her bloom earthward thro' the radiant air
    Leaving her rounded fruit, their beauty, bare
      To the everlasting dawn; and, in thy palm
        The golden apple of the Hesperian isle
    Which thou must only yield to the Most Fair;
      But not to Juno's great luxurious calm,
              Nor Dian's curved white moon,
              Gav'st thou the sunset's boon,
    Nor to foam-bosomed Aphrodite's rose-lipped smile.


    XIII

    Here didst thou make the eternal choice aright,
      Here, in this hallowed haunt of nymph and faun,
    They stood before thee in that great new light,
      The three great splendours of the immortal dawn,
    With all the cloudy veils of Time withdrawn
      Or only glistening round the firm white snows
        Of their pure beauty like the golden dew
    Brushed from the feathery ferns below the lawn;
      But not to cold Diana's morning rose,
              Nor to great Juno's frown
              Cast thou the apple down,
    And, when the Paphian raised her lustrous eyes anew,


    XIV

    Thou from thy soul didst whisper--_in that heaven
      Which yearns beyond us! Lead me up the height!
    How should the golden fruit to one be given
      Till your three splendours in that Sun unite
    Where each in each ye move like light in light?
      How should I judge the rapture till I know
        The pain?_ And like three waves of music there
    They closed thee round, blinding thy blissful sight
      With beauty and, like one roseate orb a-glow,
              They bore thee on their breasts
              Up the sun-smitten crests
    And melted with thee smiling into the Most Fair.


    XV

    Upward and onward, ever as ye went
      The cities of the world nestled beneath
    Closer, as if in love, round Ida, blent
      With alien hills in one great bridal-wreath
    Of dawn-flushed clouds; while, breathing with your breath
      New heavens mixed with your mounting bliss. Deep eyes,
        Beautiful eyes, imbrued with the world's tears
    Dawned on you, beautiful gleams of Love and Death
      Flowed thro' your questioning with divine replies
              From that ineffable height
              Dark with excess of light
    Where the Ever-living dies and the All-loving hears.


    XVI

    For thou hadst seen what tears upon man's face
      Bled from the heart or burned from out the brain,
    And not denied or cursed, but couldst embrace
      Infinite sweetness in the heart of pain,
    And heardst those universal choirs again
      Wherein like waves of one harmonious sea
        All our slight dreams of heaven are singing still,
    And still the throned Olympians swell the strain,
      And, hark, the burden, of all--_Come unto Me!_
              Sky into deepening sky
              Melts with that one great cry;
    And the lost doves of Ida moan on Siloa's hill.


    XVII

    I gather all the ages in my song
      And send them singing up the heights to thee!
    Chord by æonian chord the stars prolong
      Their passionate echoes to Eternity:
    Earth wakes, and one orchestral symphony
      Sweeps o'er the quivering harp-strings of mankind;
        Grief modulates into heaven, hate drowns in love,
    No strife now but of love in that great sea
      Of song!   I dream!   I dream!   Mine eyes grow blind:
              Chords that I not command
              Escape the fainting hand;
    Tears fall. Thou canst not hear. Thou'rt still too far above.


    XVIII

    Farewell!   What word should answer but farewell
      From thee, O happy spirit, whose clear gaze
    Discerned the path--clear, but unsearchable--
      Where Olivet sweetens, deepens, Ida's praise,
    The path that strikes as thro' a sunlit haze
      Through Time to that clear reconciling height
        Where our commingling gleams of godhead dwell;
    Strikes thro' the turmoil of our darkling days
      To that great harmony where, like light in light,
              Wisdom and Beauty still
              Haunt the thrice-holy hill,
    And Love, immortal Love ... what answer but farewell?




THE ELECTRIC TRAM


    I

    Bluff and burly and splendid
            Thro' roaring traffic-tides,
    By secret lightnings attended
            The land-ship hisses and glides.
    And I sit on its bridge and I watch and I dream
            While the world goes gallantly by,
    With all its crowded houses and its colored shops a-stream
            Under the June-blue sky,
                    Heigh, ho!
            Under the June-blue sky.


    II

    There's a loafer at the kerb with a sulphur-coloured pile
            Of "Lights! Lights! Lights!" to sell;
    And a flower-girl there with some lilies and a smile
            By the gilt swing-doors of a drinking hell,
    Where the money is rattling loud and fast,
    And I catch one glimpse as the ship swings past
            Of a woman with a babe at her breast
              Wrapped in a ragged shawl;
            She is drinking away with the rest,
              And the sun shines over it all,
                    Heigh, ho!
              The sun shines over it all!


    III

    And a barrel-organ is playing,
            Somewhere, far away,
    _Abide with me_, and _The world is gone a-maying_,
            And _What will the policeman say?_
    There's a glimpse of the river down an alley by a church,
            And the barges with their tawny-coloured sails,
    And a grim and grimy coal-wharf where the London pigeons perch
            And flutter and spread their tails,
                    Heigh, ho!
            Flutter and spread their tails.


    IV

    O, what does it mean, all the pageant and the pity,
            The waste and the wonder and the shame?
    I am riding tow'rds the sunset thro' the vision of a City
            Which we cloak with the stupor of a name!
    I am riding thro' ten thousand thousand tragedies and terrors,
            Ten million heavens that save and hells that damn;
    And the lightning draws my car tow'rds the golden evening star;
            And--They call it only "riding on a tram,"
                    Heigh, ho!
            They call it only "riding on a tram."




SHERWOOD


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA

ROBIN                    Earl of Huntingdon, known as "Robin Hood."

LITTLE JOHN            }
FRIAR TUCK             }
WILL SCARLET           } Outlaws and followers of "Robin Hood."
REYNOLD GREENLEAF      }
MUCH, THE MILLER'S SON }
ALLAN-A-DALE           }

PRINCE JOHN.
KING RICHARD, Coeur de Lion.
BLONDEL                  King Richard's minstrel.
OBERON                   King of the Fairies.
TITANIA                  Queen of the Fairies.
PUCK                     A Fairy.
THE SHERIFF OF NOTTINGHAM.
FITZWALTER               Father of Marian, known as "Maid Marian."
SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF         A Fool.
ARTHUR PLANTAGENET       Nephew to Prince John, a boy of about ten years of age.
QUEEN ELINOR             Mother of Prince John and Richard Lion-Heart.
MARIAN FITZWALTER        Known as Maid Marian, betrothed to Robin Hood.
JENNY                    Maid to Marian.
WIDOW SCARLET            Mother of Will Scarlet.
PRIORESS OF KIRKLEE.

Fairies, merry men, serfs, peasants, mercenaries, an abbot, a baron, a
novice, nuns, courtiers, soldiers, retainers, etc.




ACT I


SCENE I. _Night. The borders of the forest. The smouldering embers of a
Saxon homestead. The SHERIFF and his men are struggling with a SERF._

    SERF

    No, no, not that! not that! If you should blind me
    God will repay you. Kill me out of hand!

    [_Enter PRINCE JOHN and several of his retainers._]

    JOHN

    Who is this night-jar?

    [_The retainers laugh._]

                                 Surely, master Sheriff,
    You should have cut its tongue out, first. Its cries
    Tingle so hideously across the wood
    They'll wake the King in Palestine. Small wonder
    That Robin Hood evades you.

    SHERIFF

    [_To the SERF._]

                                      Silence, dog,
    Know you not better than to make this clamour
    Before Prince John?

    SERF

                           Prince John! It is Prince John!
    For God's love save me, sir!

    JOHN

                                Whose thrall is he?

    SHERIFF

    I know not, sir, but he was caught red-handed
    Killing the king's deer. By the forest law
    He should of rights be blinded; for, as you see,

    [_He indicates the SERF'S right hand._]

    'Tis not his first deer at King Richard's cost.

    JOHN

         'Twill save you trouble if you say at mine.

    SHERIFF

    Ay, sir, I pray your pardon--at _your_ cost!
    His right hand lacks the thumb and arrow-finger,
    And though he vows it was a falling tree
    That crushed them, you may trust your Sheriff, sir,
    It was the law that clipped them when he last
    Hunted your deer.

    SERF

                Prince, when the Conqueror came,
    They burned my father's homestead with the rest
    To make the King a broader hunting-ground.
    I have hunted there for food. How could I bear
    To hear my hungry children crying? Prince,
    They'll make good bowmen for your wars, one day.

    JOHN

    He is much too fond of 'Prince': he'll never live
    To see a king. Whose thrall?--his iron collar,
    Look, is the name not on it?

    SHERIFF

                                 Sir, the name
    Is filed away, and in another hour
    The ring would have been broken. He is one of those
    Green adders of the moon, night-creeping thieves
    Whom Huntingdon has tempted to the woods.
    These desperate ruffians flee their lawful masters
    And flock around the disaffected Earl
    Like ragged rooks around an elm, by scores!
    And now, i' faith, the sun of Huntingdon
    Is setting fast. They've well nigh beggared him,
    Eaten him out of house and home. They say
    That, when we make him outlaw, we shall find
    Nought to distrain upon, but empty cupboards.

    JOHN

    Did you not serve him once yourself?

    SHERIFF

                                          Oh, ay,
    He was more prosperous then. But now my cupboards
    Are full, and his are bare. Well, I'd think scorn
    To share a crust with outcast churls and thieves,
    Doffing his dignity, letting them call him
    Robin, or Robin Hood, as if an Earl
    Were just a plain man, which he will be soon,
    When we have served our writ of outlawry!
    'Tis said he hopes much from the King's return
    And swears by Lion-Heart; and though King Richard
    Is brother to yourself, 'tis all the more
    Ungracious, sir, to hope he should return,
    And overset your rule. But then--to keep
    Such base communications! Myself would think it
    Unworthy of my sheriffship, much more
    Unworthy a right Earl.

    JOHN

                           You talk too much!
    This whippet, here, slinks at his heel, you say.
    Mercy may close her eyes, then. Take him off,
    Blind him or what you will; and let him thank
    His master for it. But wait--perhaps he knows
    Where we may trap this young patrician thief.
    Where is your master?

    SERF

                          Where you'll never find him.

    JOHN

    Oh, ho! the dog is faithful! Take him away.
    Get your red business done, I shall require
    Your men to ride with me.

    SHERIFF

    [_To his men._]

                              Take him out yonder,
    A bow-shot into the wood, so that his clamour
    Do not offend my lord. Delay no time,
    The irons are hot by this. They'll give you light
    Enough to blind him by.

    SERF

    [_Crying out and struggling as he is forced back into the forest._]

                            No, no, not that!
    God will repay you! Kill me out of hand!

    SHERIFF

    [_To PRINCE JOHN._]

    There is a kind of justice in all this.
    The irons being heated in that fire, my lord,
    Which was his hut, aforetime.

    [_Some of the men take the glowing irons from the fire and follow
    into the wood._]

                                              There's no need
    To parley with him, either. The snares are laid
    For Robin Hood. He goes this very night
    To his betrothal feast.

    JOHN

                              Betrothal feast!

    SHERIFF

    At old Fitzwalter's castle, sir.

    JOHN

                                        Ha! ha!
    There will be one more guest there than he thought!
    Ourselves are riding thither. We intended
    My Lady Marian for a happier fate
    Than bride to Robin Hood. Your plans are laid
    To capture him?

    SHERIFF

    [_Consequentially._]

                                    It was our purpose, sir,
    To serve the writ of outlawry upon him
    And capture him as he came forth.

    JOHN

                                     That's well.
    Then--let him disappear--you understand?

    SHERIFF

    I have your warrant, sir? Death? A great Earl?

    JOHN

    Why, first declare him outlawed at his feast!
    'Twill gladden the tremulous heart of old Fitzwalter
    With his prospective son-in-law; and then--
    No man will overmuch concern himself
    Whither an outlaw goes. You understand?

    SHERIFF

    It shall be done, sir.

    JOHN

                            But the Lady Marian!
    By heaven, I'll take her. I'll banish old Fitzwalter
    If he prevent my will in this. You'll bring
    How many men to ring the castle round?

    SHERIFF

    A good five score of bowmen.

    JOHN

                                Then I'll take her
    This very night as hostage for Fitzwalter,
    Since he consorts with outlaws. These grey rats
    Will gnaw my kingdom's heart out. For 'tis mine,
    This England, now or later. They that hold
    By Richard, as their absent king, would make
    My rule a usurpation. God, am I
    My brother's keeper?

    [_There is a cry in the forest from the SERF, who immediately
    afterwards appears at the edge of the glade, shaking
    himself free from his guards. He seizes a weapon
    and rushes at PRINCE JOHN. One of the retainers runs
    him through and he falls at the PRINCE'S feet._]

    JOHN

                          That's a happy answer!

    SHERIFF

    [_Stooping over the body._]

    He is dead.

    JOHN

                  I am sorry. It were better sport
    To send him groping like a hoodman blind
    Through Sherwood, whimpering for his Robin. Come,
    I'll ride with you to this betrothal feast.
    Now for my Lady Marian!

    [_Exeunt all. A pause. The scene darkens. Shadowy figures creep
    out from the thickets, of old men, women and children._]

    FIRST OLD MAN

    [_Stretching his arms up to Heaven._]

                                    God, am I
    My brother's keeper? Witness, God in heaven,
    He said it and not we--Cain's word, he said it!

    FIRST WOMAN

    [_Kneeling by the body._]

    O Father, Father, and the blood of Abel
    Cries to thee!

    A BLIND MAN

                    Is there any light here still?
    I feel a hot breath on my face. The dark
    Is better for us all. I am sometimes glad
    They blinded me those many years ago.
    Princes are princes; and God made the world
    For one or two it seems.   Well, I am glad
    I cannot see His world.

    FIRST WOMAN

    [_Still by the body and whispering to the others._]

                              Keep him away.
    'Tis as we thought. The dead man is his son.
    Keep him away, poor soul. He need not know.

    [_Some of the men carry the body among the thickets._]

    A CHILD

    Mother, I'm hungry, I'm hungry!

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                    There's no food
    For any of us to-night. The snares are empty,
    And I can try no more.

    THE BLIND MAN

                          Wait till my son
    Comes back. He's a rare hunter is my boy.
    You need not fret, poor little one. My son
    Is much too quick and clever for the Sheriff.
    He'll bring you something good. Why, ha! ha! ha!
    Friends, I've a thought--the Sheriff's lit the fire
    Ready for us to roast our meat. Come, come,
    Let us be merry while we may! My boy
    Will soon come back with food for the old folks.
    The fire burns brightly, eh?

    SECOND OLD MAN

                                The fire that feeds
    On hope and eats our hearts away. They've burnt
    Everything, everything!

    THE BLIND MAN

                            Ah, princes are princes!
    But when the King comes home from the Crusade,
    We shall have better times.

    FIRST OLD MAN

                              Ay, when the King
    Comes home from the Crusade.

    CHILD

                                  Mother, I'm hungry.

    SECOND WOMAN

    Oh, but if I could only find a crust
    Left by the dogs. Masters, the child will starve.
    We must have food.

    THE BLIND MAN

                      I tell you when my boy
    Comes back, we shall have plenty!

    FIRST WOMAN

                                      God pity thee!

    THE BLIND MAN

    What dost thou mean?

    SECOND WOMAN

                        Masters, the child will starve.

    FIRST OLD MAN

    Hist, who comes here--a forester?

    THE BLIND MAN

                                      We'd best
    Slip back into the dark.

    FIRST WOMAN

    [_Excitedly._]

                            No, stay! All's well.
    There's Shadow-of-a-Leaf, good Lady Marian's fool
    Beside him!

    THE BLIND MAN

                    Ah, they say there's fairy blood
    In Shadow-of-a-Leaf. But I've no hopes of more
    From him, than wild bees' honey-bags.

    [_Enter LITTLE JOHN, a giant figure, leading a donkey, laden
    with a sack. On the other side, SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF
    trips, a slender figure in green trunk-hose and doublet.
    He is tickling the donkey's ears with a long fern._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                        Gee! Whoa!
    Neddy, my boy, have you forgot the Weaver,
    And how Titania tickled your long ears?
    Ha! ha! Don't ferns remind you?

    LITTLE JOHN

                                      Friends, my master
    Hath sent me to you, fearing ye might hunger.

    FIRST OLD MAN

    Thy master?

    LITTLE JOHN

                   Robin Hood.

    SECOND WOMAN

    [_Falling on her knees._]

                                God bless his name.
    God bless the kindly name of Robin Hood.

    LITTLE JOHN

    [_Giving them food._]

    'Tis well nigh all that's left him; and to-night
    He goes to his betrothal feast.

    [_All the outcasts except the first old man exeunt._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Pointing to the donkey._]

                                  Now look,
    There's nothing but that shadow of a cross
    On his grey back to tell you of the palms
    That once were strewn before my Lord, the King.
    Won't ferns, won't branching ferns, do just as well?
    There's only a dream to ride my donkey now!
    But, Neddy, I'll lead you home and cry--HOSANNA!
    We'll thread the glad Gate Beautiful again,
    Though now there's only a Fool to hold your bridle
    And only moonlit ferns to strew your path,
    And the great King is fighting for a grave
    In lands beyond the sea.   Come, Neddy, come,
    Hosanna!

    [_Exit SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF with the donkey. He strews ferns
    before it as he goes._]

    FIRST OLD MAN

              'Tis a strange creature, master! Thinkest
    There's fairy blood in him?

    LITTLE JOHN

                                'Twas he that brought
    Word of your plight to Robin Hood. He flits
    Like Moonshine thro' the forest. He'll be home
    Before I know it. I must be hastening back.
    This makes a sad betrothal night.

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                    That minds me,
    Couched in the thicket yonder, we overheard
    The Sheriff tell Prince John....

    LITTLE JOHN

                                      Prince John!

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                              You'd best
    Warn Robin Hood. They're laying a trap for him.
    Ay! Now I mind me of it! I heard 'em say
    They'd take him at the castle.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                   To-night?

    FIRST OLD MAN

                                          To-night!
    Fly, lad, for God's dear love. Warn Robin Hood!
    Fly like the wind, or you'll be there too late.
    And yet you'd best be careful. There's five score
    In ambush round the castle.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                I'll be there
    An if I have to break five hundred heads!

    [_He rushes off thro' the forest. The old man goes into the thicket
    after the others. The scene darkens. A soft light, as
    of the moon, appears between the ferns to the right of the
    glade, showing OBERON and TITANIA._]

    TITANIA

    Yet one night more the gates of fairyland
    Are opened by a mortal's kindly deed.

    OBERON

    Last night the gates were shut, and I heard weeping!
    Men, women, children, beat upon the gates
    That guard our happy world. They could not sleep.
    Titania, must not that be terrible,
    When mortals cannot sleep?

    TITANIA

                              Yet one night more
    Dear Robin Hood has opened the gates wide
    And their poor weary souls can enter in.

    OBERON

    Yet one night more we woodland elves may steal
    Out thro' the gates.   I fear the time will come
    When they must close for ever; and we no more
    Shall hold our Sherwood revels.

    TITANIA

                                  Only love
    And love's kind sacrifice can open them.
    For when a mortal hurts himself to help
    Another, then he thrusts the gates wide open
    Between his world and ours.

    OBERON

                              Ay, but that's rare,
    That kind of love, Titania, for the gates
    Are almost always closed.

    TITANIA

                              Yet one night more!
    Hark, how the fairy host begins to sing
    Within the gates. Wait here and we shall see
    What weary souls by grace of Robin Hood
    This night shall enter Dreamland. See, they come!

    [_The soft light deepens in the hollow among the ferns and the ivory
    gates of Dreamland are seen swinging open. The fairy
    host is heard, singing to invite the mortals to enter._]

    [_Song of the fairies._]

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        Your world is growing old;
      But a Princess sleeps in the greenwood,
        Whose hair is brighter than gold.

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        O hearts that bleed and burn,
      Her lips are redder than roses,
        Who sleeps in the faëry fern.

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        By the Beauty that wakes anew
      Milk-white with the fragrant hawthorn
        In the drip of the dawn-red dew.

    The Forest shall conquer! The Forest shall conquer!
      The Forest shall conquer!
        O hearts that are weary of pain,
      Come back to your home in Faërie
        And wait till she wakes again.

    [_The victims of the forest-laws steal out of the thicket once
    more--dark, distorted, lame, blind, serfs with iron collars
    round their necks, old men, women and children; and as the fairy
    song breaks into chorus they pass in procession thro' the
    beautiful gates. The gates slowly close. The fairy song is heard
    as dying away in the distance._]

    TITANIA

    [_Coming out into the glade and holding up her hands to the evening
    star beyond the tree-tops._]

    Shine, shine, dear star of Love, yet one night more.


SCENE II. _A banqueting hall in FITZWALTER'S castle. The guests are
assembling for the betrothal feast of ROBIN and MARIAN. Some of ROBIN
HOOD'S men, clad in Lincoln green, are just arriving at the doors.
SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF runs forward to greet them._

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Come in, my scraps of Lincoln green; come in,
    My slips of greenwood. You're much wanted here!
    Head, heart and eyes, we are all pent up in walls
    Of stone--nothing but walls on every side--
    And not a rose to break them--big blind walls,
    Neat smooth stone walls! Come in, my ragged robins;
    Come in, my jolly minions of the moon,
    My straggling hazel-boughs! Hey, bully friar,
    Come in, my knotted oak! Ho, little Much,
    Come in, my sweet green linnet. Come, my cushats,
    Larks, yellow-hammers, fern-owls, Oh, come in,
    Come in, my Dian's foresters, and drown us
    With may, with blossoming may!

    FITZWALTER

                                    Out, Shadow-of-a-Leaf!
    Welcome, welcome, good friends of Huntingdon,
    Or Robin Hood, by whatsoever name
    You best may love him.

    CRIES

                            Robin! Robin! Robin!

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD._]

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, so be it! Myself I am right glad
    To call him at this bright betrothal feast
    My son.

    [_Lays a hand on ROBIN'S shoulder._]

                  Yet, though I would not cast a cloud
    Across our happy gathering, you'll forgive
    An old man and a father if he sees
    All your glad faces thro' a summer mist
    Of sadness.

    ROBIN

                Sadness? Yes, I understand.

    FITZWALTER

    No, Robin, no, you cannot understand.

    ROBIN

                                        Where's Marian?

    FITZWALTER

    Ay, that's all you think of, boy.
    But I must say a word to all of you
    Before she comes.

    ROBIN

                   Why--what?...

    FITZWALTER

                                    No need to look
    So startled; but it is no secret here;
    For many of you are sharers of his wild
    Adventures. Now I hoped an end had come
    To these, until another rumour reached me,
    This very day, of yet another prank.
    You know, you know, how perilous a road
    My Marian must ride if Huntingdon
    Tramples the forest-laws beneath his heel
    And, in the thin disguise of Robin Hood,
    Succours the Saxon outlaws, makes his house
    A refuge for them, lavishes his wealth
    To feed their sick and needy.

    [_The SHERIFF and two of his men appear in the great doorway
    out of sight of the guests._]

    SHERIFF

    [_Whispering._]

                                Not yet! keep back!
    One of you go--see that the guards are set!
    He must not slip us.

    FITZWALTER

                            Oh, I know his heart
    Is gold, but this is not an age of gold;
    And those who have must keep, or lose the power
    Even to help themselves. No--he must doff
    His green disguise of Robin Hood for ever,
    And wear his natural coat of Huntingdon.

    ROBIN

    Ah, which is the disguise? Day after day
    We rise and put our social armour on,
    A different mask for every friend; but steel
    Always to case our hearts. We are all so wrapped,
    So swathed, so muffled in habitual thought
    That now I swear we do not know our souls
    Or bodies from their winding-sheets; but Custom,
    Custom, the great god Custom, all day long
    Shovels the dirt upon us where we lie
    Buried alive and dreaming that we stand
    Upright and royal. Sir, I have great doubts
    About this world, doubts if we have the right
    To sit down here for this betrothal feast
    And gorge ourselves with plenty, when we know
    That for the scraps and crumbs which we let fall
    And never miss, children would kiss our hands
    And women weep in gratitude. Suppose
    A man fell wounded at your gates, you'd not
    Pass on and smile and leave him there to die.
    And can a few short miles of distance blind you?
    Miles, nay, a furlong is enough to close
    The gates of mercy. Must we thrust our hands
    Into the wounds before we can believe?
    Oh, is our sight so thick and gross? We came,
    We saw, we conquered with the Conqueror.
    We gave ourselves broad lands; and when our king
    Desired a wider hunting ground we set
    Hundreds of Saxon homes a-blaze and tossed
    Women and children back into the fire
    If they but wrung their hands against our will.
    And so we made our forest, and its leaves
    Were pitiful, more pitiful than man.
    They gave our homeless victims the same refuge
    And happy hiding place they give the birds
    And foxes. Then we made our forest-laws,
    And he that dared to hunt, even for food,
    Even on the ground where we had burned his hut,
    The ground we had drenched with his own kindred's blood,
    Poor foolish churl, why, we put out his eyes
    With red-hot irons, cut off both his hands,
    Torture him with such horrors that ... Christ God,
    How can I help but fight against it all?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Ah, gossips, if the Conqueror had but burned
    Everything with four walls, hut, castle, palace,
    And turned the whole wide world into a forest,
    Drenched us with may, we might be happy then!
    With sweet blue wood-smoke curling thro' the boughs,
    And just a pigeon's flap to break the silence,
    And ferns, of course, there's much to make men happy.
    Well, well, the forest conquers at the last!
    I saw a thistle in the castle courtyard,
    A purple thistle breaking thro' the pavement,
    Yesterday; and it's wonderful how soon
    Some creepers pick these old grey walls to pieces.
    These nunneries and these monasteries now,
    They don't spring up like flowers, so I suppose
    Old mother Nature wins the race at last.

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, my heart is with you, but I know
    A hundred ages will not change this earth.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_With a candle in his hand._]

    Gossip, suppose the sun goes out like this.
    Pouf!

    [_Blows it out._]

          Stranger things have happened.

    FITZWALTER

                                        Silence, fool!...
    So, if you share your wealth with all the world
    Earth will be none the better, and my poor girl
    Will suffer for it. Where you got the gold
    You have already lavished on the poor
    Heaven knows.

    FRIAR TUCK

                       Oh, by the mass and the sweet moon
    Of Sherwood, so do I? That's none so hard
    A riddle!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                       Ah, Friar Tuck, we know, we know!
    Under the hawthorn bough, and at the foot
    Of rainbows, that's where fairies hide their gold.
    Cut me a silver penny out of the moon
    Next time you're there.

    [_Whispers._]

                            Now tell me, have you brought
    Your quarter-staff?

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_Whispering._]

                         Hush! hush.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                      Oh, mum's the word!
    I see it!

    FITZWALTER

                        Believe me, Robin, there's one way
    And only one--patience! When Lion-Heart
    Comes home from the Crusade, he will not brook
    This blot upon our chivalry. Prince John
    Is dangerous to a heart like yours. Beware
    Of rousing him. Meanwhile, your troth holds good;
    But, till the King comes home from the Crusade
    You must not claim your bride.

    ROBIN

                                    So be it, then....
    When the great King comes home from the Crusade!...

    FITZWALTER

    Meanwhile for Marian's sake and mine, I pray
    Do nothing rash.

    [_Enter WIDOW SCARLET. She goes up to ROBIN HOOD._]

    WIDOW SCARLET

                    Are you that Robin Hood
    They call the poor man's friend?

    ROBIN

                                    I am.

    WIDOW SCARLET

                                            They told me,
    They told me I should find you here. They told me!

    ROBIN

    Come, mother, what's the trouble?

    WIDOW SCARLET

                                    Sir, my son
    Will Scarlet lies in gaol at Nottingham
    For killing deer in Sherwood! Sir, they'll hang him.
    He only wanted food for him and me!
    They'll kill him, I tell you, they'll kill him. I can't help
    Crying it out. He's all I have, all! Save him!
    I'll pray for you, I'll ...

    ROBIN

    [_To FITZWALTER, as he raises WIDOW SCARLET gently to her
    feet._]

                                  Sir, has not the King
    Come home from the Crusade? Does not your heart
    Fling open wide its gates to welcome him?

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, you set me riddles. Follow your conscience.
    Do what seems best.

    ROBIN

                          I hope there is a way,
    Mother. I knew Will Scarlet. Better heart
    There never beat beneath a leather jerkin.
    He loved the forest and the forest loves him;
    And if the lads that wear the forest's livery
    Of living green should happen to break out
    And save Will Scarlet (as on my soul I swear,
    Mother, they shall!) why, that's a matter none
    Shall answer for to prince, or king, or God,
    But you and Robin Hood; and if the judgment
    Strike harder upon us than the heavenly smile
    Of sunshine thro' the greenwood, may it fall
    Upon my head alone.

    [_Enter the SHERIFF, with two of his men._]

    SHERIFF

    [_Reads._]

                            In the King's name!
    Thou, Earl of Huntingdon, by virtue of this writ art hereby
    attainted and deprived of thine earldom, thy lands and all thy
    goods and chattels whatsoever and whereas thou hast at divers
    times trespassed against the officers of the king by force of
    arms, thou art hereby outlawed and banished the realm.

    ROBIN

    That's well.

    [_He laughs._]

                    It puts an end to the great question
    Of how I shall dispose my wealth, Fitzwalter.
    But "banished"?--No! that is beyond their power
    While I have power to breathe, unless they banish
    The kind old oaks of Sherwood. They may call it
    "Outlawed," perhaps.

    FITZWALTER

                            Who let the villain in
    Thro' doors of mine?

    CRIES

                    Out with him! Out with him!

    [_The guests draw swords and the SHERIFF retreats thro' the doorway
    with his men._]

    ROBIN

                                                  Stop!
    Put up your swords! He had his work to do.

    [_WIDOW SCARLET falls sobbing at his feet._]

    WIDOW SCARLET

    O master, master, who will save my son,
    My son?

    ROBIN

    [_Raising her._]

            Why, mother, this is but a dream,
    This poor fantastic strutting show of law!
    And you shall wake with us in Sherwood Forest
    And find Will Scarlet in your arms again.
    Come, cheerly, cheerly, we shall overcome
    All this. Hark!

    [_A bugle sounds in the distance. There is a scuffle in the doorway
    and LITTLE JOHN bursts in with his head bleeding._]

    LITTLE JOHN

               Master, master, come away!
    They are setting a trap for thee, drawing their lines
    All round the castle.

    ROBIN

              How now, Little John,
    They have wounded thee! Art hurt?

    LITTLE JOHN

               No, no, that's nothing.
    Only a bloody cockscomb. Come, be swift,
    Or, if thou wert a fox, thou'dst never slip
    Between 'em. Ah, hear that?

    [_Another bugle sounds from another direction._]

               That's number two.
    Two sides cut off already. When the third
    Sounds--they will have thee, sure as eggs is eggs.
    Prince John is there, Fitzwalter cannot save 'ee.
    They'll burn the castle down.

    ROBIN

                                Prince John is there?

    LITTLE JOHN

    Ay, and my lord Fitzwalter had best look
    Well to my mistress Marian, if these ears
    Heard right as I came creeping thro' their lines.
    Look well to her, my lord, look well to her.
    Come, master, come, for God's sake, come away.

    FITZWALTER

    Robin, this is thy rashness. I warned thee, boy!
    Prince John! Nay, that's too perilous a jest
    For even a prince to play with me. Come, Robin,
    You must away and quickly.

    ROBIN

                              Let me have
    One word with Marian.

    LITTLE JOHN

                              It would be the last
    On earth. Come, if you ever wish to see
    Her face again.

    FITZWALTER

                    Come, Robin, are you mad?
    You'll bring us all to ruin!

    [_He opens a little door in the wall._]

                                The secret passage,
    This brings you out by Much the Miller's wheel,
    Thro' an otter's burrow in the river bank.
    Come, quick, or you'll destroy us! Take this lanthorn.
    If you're in danger, slip into the stream
    And let it carry you down into the heart
    Of Sherwood. Come now, quickly, you must go!

    ROBIN

    The old cave, lads, in Sherwood, you know where
    To find me. Friar Tuck, bring Widow Scarlet
    Thither to-morrow, with a word or two
    From Lady Marian!

    FITZWALTER

                        Quickly, quickly, go.

    [_He pushes ROBIN and LITTLE JOHN into the opening and shuts
    the door. A pause._]

    Oh, I shall pay for this, this cursed folly!
    Henceforth I swear I wash my hands of him!

    [_Enter MARIAN, from a door on the right above the banqueting
    hall. She pauses, pale and frightened, on the broad
    steps leading down._]

    MARIAN

    Father, where's Robin?

    FITZWALTER

                          Child, I bade you stay
    Until I called you.

    MARIAN

                          Something frightened me!
    Father, where's Robin? Where's Robin?

    FITZWALTER

                                        Hush, Marian, hark!

    [_All stand listening._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Stealing to the foot of the stairs and whispering to LADY MARIAN._]

    Lady, they're all so silent now. I'll tell you
    I had a dream last night--there was a man
    That bled to death, because of four grey walls
    And a black-hooded nun.

    FITZWALTER

    [_Angrily._]

                            Hist, Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    [_The third bugle sounds. There is a clamour at the doors.
    Enter PRINCE JOHN and his retainers._]

    JOHN

    [_Mockingly._]

    Now this is fortunate! I come in time
    To see--Oh, what a picture! Lady Marian,
    Forgive me--coming suddenly out of the dark
    And seeing you there, robed in that dazzling white
    Above these verdant gentlemen, I feel
    Like one that greets the gracious evening star
    Thro' a gap in a great wood.
                                  Is aught amiss?
    Why are you all so silent? Ah, my good,
    My brave Fitzwalter, I most fervently
    Trust I am not inopportune.

    FITZWALTER

                                  My lord,
    I am glad that you can jest. I am sadly grieved
    And sorely disappointed in that youth
    Who has incurred your own displeasure.

    JOHN

                                        Ah?
    Your future son-in-law?

    FITZWALTER

                          Never on earth!
    He is outlawed--

    MARIAN

                          Outlawed!

    FITZWALTER

                                    And I wash my hands
    Of Huntingdon. His shadow shall not darken
    My doors again!

    JOHN

                      That's vehement! Ha! ha!
    And what does Lady Marian say?

    MARIAN

                                  My father
    Speaks hastily. I am not so unworthy.

    FITZWALTER

    Unworthy?

    MARIAN

                    Yes, unworthy as to desert him
    Because he is in trouble--the bravest man
    In England since the days of Hereward.
    You know why he is outlawed!

    FITZWALTER

    [_To PRINCE JOHN._]

                                  Sir, she speaks
    As the spoilt child of her old father's dotage.
    Give her no heed. She shall not meet with him
    On earth again, and till she promise this,
    She'll sun herself within the castle garden
    And never cross the draw-bridge.

    MARIAN

                                    Then I'll swim
    The moat!

    FRIAR TUCK

               Ha! ha! well spoken.

    MARIAN

                                    Oh, you forget,
    Father, you quite forget there is a King;
    And, when the King comes home from the Crusade,
    Will you forget Prince John and change once more?

    [_Murmurs of assent from the FORESTERS._]

    JOHN

                                 Enough of this.
    Though I be prince, I am vice-gerent too!
    Fitzwalter, I would have some private talk
    With you and Lady Marian. Bid your guests
    Remove a little--

    FITZWALTER

                            I'll lead them all within!
    And let them make what cheer they may. Come, friends.

    [_He leads them up the stairs to the inner room._]

    My lord, I shall return immediately!

    [_Exeunt FITZWALTER and the guests._]

    JOHN

    Marian!

    MARIAN

            My lord!

    JOHN

    [_Drawing close to her._]

                    I have come to urge a plea
    On your behalf as well as on my own!
    Listen, you may not know it--I must tell you.
    I have watched your beauty growing like a flower,
    With--why should I not say it--worship; yes,
    Marian, I will not hide it.

    MARIAN

                                  Sir, you are mad!
    Sir, and your bride, your bride, not three months wedded!
    You cannot mean ...

    JOHN

                                Listen to me! Ah, Marian,
    You'd be more merciful if you knew all!
    D'you think that princes wed to please themselves?

    MARIAN

    Sir, English maidens do; and I am plighted
    Not to a prince, but to an outlawed man.

    JOHN

               Listen to me! One word! Marian, one word!
    I never meant you harm! Indeed, what harm
    Could come of this? Is not your father poor?
    I'd make him rich! Is not your lover outlawed?
    I'd save him from the certain death that waits him.
    You say the forest-laws afflict your soul
    And his--you say you'd die for their repeal!
    Well--I'll repeal them. All the churls in England
    Shall bless your name and mix it in their prayers
    With heaven itself.

    MARIAN

                          The price?

    JOHN

                                    You call it that!
    To let me lay the world before your feet,
    To let me take this little hand in mine.
    Why should I hide my love from you?

    MARIAN

                                        No more,
    I'll hear no more! You are a prince, you say?

    JOHN

    One word--suppose it some small sacrifice,
    To save those churls for whom you say your heart
    Bleeds; yet you will not lift your little finger
    To save them! And what hinders you?--A breath,
    A dream, a golden rule! Can you not break it
    For a much greater end?

    MARIAN

                            I'd die to save them.

    JOHN

    Then live to save them.

    MARIAN

                              No, you will not let me;
    D'you think that bartering my soul will help
    To save another? If there's no way but this,
    Then through my lips those suffering hundreds cry,
    We choose the suffering. All that is good in them,
    All you have left, all you have not destroyed,
    Cries out against you: and I'll go to them,
    Suffer and toil and love and die with them
    Rather than touch your hand. You over-rate
    Your power to hurt our souls. You are mistaken!
    There is a golden rule!

    JOHN

                              And with such lips
    You take to preaching! I was a fool to worry
    Your soul with reason. With hair like yours--it's hopeless!
    But Marian--you shall hear me.

    [_He catches her in his arms._]

                              Yes, by God,
    Marian, you shall! I love you.

    MARIAN

    [_Struggling._]

                            You should not live!

    JOHN

    One kiss, then! Devil take it.

    [_Enter FITZWALTER above._]

    MARIAN

    [_Wresting herself free._]

                                  You should not live!
    Were I a man and not a helpless girl
    You should not live!

    JOHN

                            Come, now, that's very wicked.
    See how these murderous words affright your father.
    My good Fitzwalter, there's no need to look
    So ghastly. For your sake and hers and mine
    I have been trying to make your girl forget
    The name of Huntingdon. A few short months
    At our gay court would blot his memory out!
    I promise her a life of dazzling pleasures,
    And, in return she flies at me--a tigress--
    Clamouring for my blood! Try to persuade her!

    FITZWALTER

    My lord, you are very good. She must decide
    Herself.

    JOHN

    [_Angrily._]

                  I'll not be trifled with! I hold
    The hand of friendship out and you evade it,
    The moment I am gone, back comes your outlaw.
    You say you have no power with your own child!
    Well, then I'll take her back this very night;
    Back to the court with me. How do I know
    What treasons you are hatching here? I'll take her
    As hostage for yourself.

    FITZWALTER

                            My lord, you jest!
    I have sworn to you.

    JOHN

                            No more! If you be loyal,
    What cause have you to fear?

    FITZWALTER

                              My lord, I'll give
    A hundred other pledges; but not this.

    JOHN

    By heaven, will you dictate your terms to me?
    I say that she shall come back to the court
    This very night! Ho, there, my men.

    [_Enter JOHN'S retainers._]

                                  Escort
    This lady back with us.

    FITZWALTER

    Back there, keep back. Prince or no prince,
    I say she shall not go!

    [_He draws his sword._]

                              I'd rather see her
    Begging in rags with outlawed Huntingdon
    Than that one finger of yours should soil her glove.

    JOHN

    So here's an end of fawning, here's the truth,
    My old white-bearded hypocrite. Come, take her,
    Waste no more time. Let not the old fool daunt you
    With that great skewer.

    FITZWALTER

    [_As JOHN'S men advance._]

                             By God, since you will have it,
    Since you will drive me to my last resort,
    Break down my walls, and hound me to the forest,
    This is the truth! Out of my gates! Ho, help!
    A Robin Hood! A Robin Hood!

    [_There is a clamour from the upper room. The doors are flung
    open and the FORESTERS appear at the head of the steps._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_Coming down into the hall and brandishing his quarter-staff._]

                                              A Robin?
    Who calls on Robin Hood? His men are here
    To answer.

    FITZWALTER

                 Drive these villains out of my gates.

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_To PRINCE JOHN._]

    Sir, I perceive you are a man of wisdom,
    So let me counsel you. There's not a lad
    Up yonder, but at four-score yards can shoot
    A swallow on the wing. They have drunken deep.
    I cannot answer but their hands might loose
    Their shafts before they know it. Now shall I give
    The word? Ready, my lads!

    [_The FORESTERS make ready to shoot. JOHN hesitates for a
    moment._]

    JOHN

                                  My Lady Marian,
    One word, and then I'll take my leave of you!

    [_She pays no heed._]

    Farewell, then! I have five-score men at hand!
    And they shall be but lightning to the hell
    Of my revenge, Fitzwalter. I will not leave
    One stone upon another. From this night's work
    Shall God Himself not save you.

    [_Exeunt JOHN and his men._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_As they go out._]

                                  My Lord Fitzwalter!
    I have confessed him! Shall I bid 'em shoot?
    'Twill save a world of trouble.

    FITZWALTER

                                  No; or the King
    Himself will come against me. Follow them out,
    Drive them out of my gates, then raise the drawbridge
    And let none cross. Oh, I foresaw, foretold!
    Robin has wrecked us all!

    [_Exeunt the FORESTERS and FITZWALTER. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF
    remains alone with MARIAN._]

    MARIAN

    [_She flings herself down on a couch and buries her head in her arms._]

                            O Robin, Robin,
    I cannot lose you now!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Sitting at her feet. The lights grow dim._]

                            Ah, well, the prince
    Promised to break the walls down. Don't you think
    These villains are a sort of ploughshare, lady,
    And where they plough, who knows what wheat may spring!
    The lights are burning low and very low;
    So, Lady Marian, let me tell my dream.
    There was a forester that bled to death
    Because of four grey walls and a black nun
    Whose face I could not see--but, oh, beware!
    Though I am but your fool, your Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    Dancing before the wild winds of the future,
    I feel them thrilling through my tattered wits
    Long ere your wisdom feels them. My poor brain
    Is like a harp hung in a willow-tree
    Swept by the winds of fate. I am but a fool,
    But oh, beware of that black-hooded nun.

    MARIAN

    This is no time for jesting, Shadow-of-a-Leaf.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    The lights are burning low. Do you not feel
    A cold breath on your face?

    MARIAN

                              Fling back that shutter!
    Look out and tell me what is happening.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Flinging back the shutter._]

                                           Look,
    Look, gossip, how the moon comes dancing in.
    Ah, they have driven Prince John across the drawbridge.
    They are raising it, now!

    [_There are cries in the distance, then a heavy sound of chains
    clanking and silence. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF turns from
    the window and stands in the stream of moonlight,
    pointing to the door on the left._]

                              Look! Look!

    MARIAN

    [_Starting up with a cry of fear._]

                                        Ah!

    [_The tall figure of a nun glides into the moonlit hall and throwing
    back her hood reveals the face of QUEEN ELINOR._]

    ELINOR

                                          Lady Marion,
    Tell me quickly, where is Huntingdon hiding?

    MARIAN

    The Queen!

    ELINOR

    Yes! Yes! I donned this uncouth garb
    To pass through your besiegers. If Prince John
    Discover it, all is lost. Come, tell me quickly,
    Where is Robin?

    MARIAN

                    Escaped, I hope.

    ELINOR

                                    Not here?

    MARIAN

    No!

    ELINOR

        Come, dear Lady Marian, do not doubt me.
    I am here to save you both.

    MARIAN

                                He is not here.

    ELINOR

    Ah, but you know where I may find him, Marian.
    All will be lost if you delay to tell me
    Where I may speak with him. He is in peril.
    By dawn Prince John will have five hundred men
    Beleaguering the castle. You are all ruined
    Unless you trust me! Armies will scour the woods
    To hunt him down. Even now he may be wounded,
    Helpless to save himself.

    MARIAN

                              Wounded!

    ELINOR

                                    Dear child,
    Take me to him. Here, on this holy cross,
    My mother's dying gift, I swear to you
    I wish to save him.

    MARIAN

                      Oh, but how?

    ELINOR

                                  Trust me!

    MARIAN

    Wounded! He may be wounded! Oh, if I could,
    I'd go to him! I am helpless, prisoned here.
    My father ...

    ELINOR

              I alone can save your father.
    Give me your word that if I can persuade him,
    You'll lead me to your lover's hiding place,
    And let me speak with him.

    [_Enter FITZWALTER._]

                              Ah, my Lord Fitzwalter!

    FITZWALTER

    The queen! O madam, madam, I am driven
    Beyond myself. This girl, this foolish girl
    Has brought us all to ruin. This Huntingdon,
    As I foresaw, foresaw, foretold, foretold,
    Has dragged me down with him.

    ELINOR

                                I am on your side,
    If you will hear me; and you yet may gain
    A son in Robin Hood.

    FITZWALTER

                              Madam, I swear
    I have done with him. I pray you do not jest;
    But if you'll use your power to save my lands ...
    I was provoked!...
    Prince John required this child here--

    ELINOR

                                        Oh, I know!
    But you'll forgive him that! I do not wonder
    That loveliness like hers--

    FITZWALTER

                              Ay, but you'll pardon
    A father's natural anger. Madam, I swear
    I was indeed provoked. But you'll assure him
    I've washed my hands of Huntingdon.

    MARIAN

                                        And yet
    His men are, even now, guarding your walls!
    Father, you cannot, you shall not--

    FITZWALTER

                                        Oh, be silent!
    Who wrapt me in this tangle? Are you bent
    On driving me out in my old age to seek
    Shelter in caves and woods?

    ELINOR

                                  My good Fitzwalter,
    It has not come to that! If you will trust me
    All will be well; but I must speak a word
    With Robin Hood.

    FITZWALTER

                    You!

    ELINOR

                      Oh, I have a reason.
    Your daughter knows his hiding place.

    FITZWALTER

                                        She knows!

    ELINOR

    Oh, trust them both for that. I am risking much!
    To-morrow she shall guide me there. This bird
    Being flown, trust me to make your peace with John.

    FITZWALTER

    But--Marian!

    ELINOR

                      She'll be safer far with Robin,
    Than loitering here until your roof-tree burns.
    I think you know it. Fitzwalter, I can save you,
    I swear it on this cross.

    FITZWALTER

                            But--Marian! Marian!

    ELINOR

    Your castle wrapt in flame!...
                                   There's nought to fear,
    If she could--Marian, once, at a court masque,
    You wore a page's dress of Lincoln green,
    And a green hood that muffled half your face,
    I could have sworn 'twas Robin come again--
    He was my page, you know--
    Wear it to-morrow--go, child, bid your maid
    Make ready--we'll set out betimes.

    MARIAN

    [_Going up to her father._]

                                      I'll go,
    If you will let me, father. He may be wounded!
    Father, forgive me. Let me go to him.

    ELINOR

    Go, child, first do my bidding. He'll consent
    When you return.

    [_Exit MARIAN._]

                    My dear good friend Fitzwalter,
    Trust me, _I_ have some power with Huntingdon.
    All shall be as you wish. I'll let her guide me,
    But--as for her--she shall not even see him
    Unless you wish. Trust me to wind them all
    Around my little finger.

    FITZWALTER

                            It is dark here.
    Let us within. Madam, I think you are right.
    And you'll persuade Prince John?

    ELINOR

    [_As they go up the steps._]

                                  I swear by this,
    This holy cross, my mother's dying gift!

    FITZWALTER

    It's very sure he'd burn the castle down.

    [_Exeunt._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Coming out into the moonlight and staring up after them._]

    The nun! The nun! They'll whip me if I speak,
    For I am only Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the Fool.

    [_Curtain._]




ACT II


_SCENE I. Sherwood Forest: An open glade, showing on the right the mouth
of the outlaw's cave. It is about sunset. The giant figure of LITTLE
JOHN comes out of the cave, singing._

    LITTLE JOHN

    [_Sings._]


            When Spring comes back to England
              And crowns her brows with may,
            Round the merry moonlit world
              She goes the greenwood way.

    [_He stops and calls in stentorian tones._]

    Much! Much! Much! Where has he vanished now,
    Where has that monstrous giant the miller's son
    Hidden himself?

    [_Enter MUCH, a dwarf-like figure, carrying a large bundle of ferns._]

    MUCH

                    Hush, hush, child, here I am!
    And here's our fairy feather-beds, ha! ha!
    Come, praise me, praise me, for a thoughtful parent.
    There's nothing makes a better bed than ferns
    Either for sleeping sound or rosy dreams.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Take care the fern-seed that the fairies use
    Get not among thy yellow locks, my Titan,
    Or thou'lt wake up invisible. There's none
    Too much of Much already.

    MUCH

    [_Looking up at him impudently._]

                                It would take
    Our big barn full of fern-seed, I misdoubt,
    To make thee walk invisible, Little John,
    My sweet Tom Thumb! And, in this troublous age
    Of forest-laws, if we night-walking minions,
    We gentlemen of the moon, could only hunt
    Invisible, there's many and many of us
    With thumbs lopped off, eyes gutted and legs pruned,
    Slick, like poor pollarded pear-trees, would be lying
    Happy and whole this day beneath the boughs.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Invisible? Ay, but what would Jenny say
    To such a ghostly midge as thou would'st be
    Sipping invisibly at her cherry lips.

    MUCH

    Why, there now, that's a teaser. E'en as it is
    (Don't joke about it) my poor Jenny takes
    The smallness of her Much sorely to heart!
    And though I often tell her half a loaf
    (Ground in our mill) is better than no bread,
    She weeps, poor thing, that an impartial heaven
    Bestows on her so small a crumb of bliss
    As me! You'd scarce believe, now, half the nostrums,
    Possets and strangely nasty herbal juices
    That girl has made me gulp, in the vain hope
    That I, the frog, should swell to an ox like thee.
    I tell her it's all in vain, and she still cheats
    Her fancy and swears I've grown well nigh three feet
    Already. O Lord, she's desperate. She'll advance
    Right inward to the sources of creation,
    She'll take the reins of the world in hand. She'll stop
    The sun like Joshua, turn the moon to blood,
    And if I have to swallow half the herbs
    In Sherwood, I shall stalk a giant yet,
    Shoulder to shoulder with thee, Little John,
    And crack thy head at quarter-staff. But don't,
    Don't joke about it. 'Tis a serious matter.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Into the cave, then, with thy feather-bed.
    Old Much, thy father, waits thee there to make
    A table of green turfs for Robin Hood.
    We shall have guests anon, O merry times,
    Baron and Knight and abbot, all that ride
    Through Sherwood, all shall come and dine with him
    When they have paid their toll! Old Much is there
    Growling at thy delay.

    MUCH

    [_Going towards the cave._]

                          O, my poor father.
    Now, there's a sad thing, too. He is so ashamed
    Of his descendants. Why for some nine years
    He shut his eyes whenever he looked at me;
    And I have seen him on the village green
    Pretend to a stranger, once, who badgered him
    With curious questions, that I was the son
    Of poor old Gaffer Bramble, the lame sexton.
    That self-same afternoon, up comes old Bramble
    White hair a-blaze and big red waggling nose
    All shaking with the palsy; bangs our door
    Clean off its hinges with his crab-tree crutch,
    And stands there--framed--against the sunset sky!
    He stretches out one quivering fore-finger
    At father, like the great Destroying Angel
    In the stained window: straight, the milk boiled over,
    The cat ran, baby squalled and mother screeched.
    Old Bramble asks my father--what--what--what
    He meant--he meant--he meant! You should have seen
    My father's hopeless face! Lord, how he blushed,
    Red as a beet-root! Lord, Lord, how he blushed!
    'Tis a hard business when a parent looks
    Askance upon his offspring.

    [_Exit into the cave._]

    LITTLE JOHN

                              Skip, you chatterer!
    Here comes our master.

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD._]

                            Master, where hast thou been?
    I feared some harm had come to thee. What's this?
    This was a cloth-yard shaft that tore thy coat!

    ROBIN

    Oh, ay, they barked my shoulder, devil take them.
    I got it on the borders of the wood.
    St. Nicholas, my lad, they're on the watch.

    LITTLE JOHN

    What didst thou there? They're on the watch, i' faith!
    A squirrel could not pass them. Why, my namesake
    Prince John would sell his soul to get thy head,
    And both his ears for Lady Marian;
    And whether his ears or soul be worth the more,
    I know not. When the first lark flittered up
    To sing, at dawn, I woke; and thou wast gone.
    What didst thou there?

    ROBIN

                          Well, first I went to swim
    In the deep pool below the mill.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                  I swam
    Enough last night to last me many a day.
    What then?

    ROBIN

              I could not wash away the thought
    Of all you told me. If Prince John should dare!
    That helpless girl! No, no, I will not think it.
    Why, Little John, I went and tried to shoot
    A grey goose wing thro' Lady Marian's casement.

    LITTLE JOHN

    Oh, ay, and a pink nosegay tied beneath it.
    Now, master, you'll forgive your Little John,--
    But that's midsummer madness and the may
    Is only half in flower as yet. But why--
    You are wounded--why are you so pale?

    ROBIN

                                            No--no--
    Not wounded; but oh, my good faithful friend,
    She is not there! I wished to send her warning.
    I could not creep much closer; but I swear
    I think the castle is in the hands of John.
    I saw some men upon the battlements,
    Not hers--I know--not hers!

    LITTLE JOHN

    Hist, who comes here?

    [_He seizes his bow and stands ready to shoot._]

    ROBIN

    Stop, man, it is the fool. Thank God, the fool,
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, my Marian's dainty fool.
    How now, good fool, what news? What news?

    [_Enter SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                    Good fool!
    Should I be bad, sir, if I chanced to bring
    No news at all? That is the wise man's way.
    Thank heaven, I've lost my wits. I am but a leaf
    Dancing upon the wild winds of the world,
    A prophet blown before them. Well, this evening,
    It is that lovely grey wind from the West
    That silvers all the fields and all the seas,
    And I'm the herald of May!

    ROBIN

                              Come, Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    I pray thee, do not jest.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                               I do not jest.
    I am vaunt-courier to a gentleman,
    A sweet slim page in Lincoln green who comes,
    Wood-knife on hip, and wild rose in his face,
    With golden news of Marian. Oh, his news
    Is one crammed honeycomb, swelling with sweetness
    In twenty thousand cells; but delicate!
    So send thy man aside.

    ROBIN

                             Go, Little John.

    [_LITTLE JOHN goes into the cave._]

    Well, Shadow-of-a-Leaf, where is he?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                    At this moment
    His hair is tangled in a rose bush: hark,
    He swears, like a young leopard! Nay, he is free.
    Come, master page, here is that thief of love,
    Give him your message. I'll to Little John.

    [_Exit into the cave. Enter MARIAN, as a page in Lincoln green,
    her face muffled in a hood._]

    ROBIN

    Good even, master page, what is thy news
    Of Lady Marian?

    [_She stands silent._]

                                  Answer me quickly, come,
    Hide not thy face!

    [_She still stands muffled and silent._]

                     Come, boy, the fool is chartered,
    Not thou; and I'll break off this hazel switch
    And make thee dance if thou not answer me.
    What? Silent still? Sirrah, this hazel wand
    Shall lace thee till thou tingle, top to toe.
    I'll ...

    MARIAN

    [_Unmuffling._]

                 Robin!

    ROBIN

    [_Catches her in his arms with a cry._]

                        Marian! Marian!

    MARIAN

                                       Fie upon you,
    Robin, you did not know me.

    ROBIN

    [_Embracing her._]

                                          Oh, you seemed
    Ten thousand miles away. This is not moonlight,
    And I am not Endymion. Could I dream
    My Dian would come wandering through the fern
    Before the sunset? Even that rose your face
    You muffled in its own green leaves.

    MARIAN

                                           But you,
    Were hidden in the heart of Sherwood, Robin,
    Hidden behind a million mighty boughs,
    And yet I found you.

    ROBIN

                      Ay, the young moon stole
    In pity down to her poor shepherd boy;
    But he could never climb the fleecy clouds
    Up to her throne, never could print one kiss
    On her immortal lips. He lay asleep
    Among the poppies and the crags of Latmos,
    And she came down to him, his queen stole down.

    MARIAN

    Oh, Robin, first a rose and then a moon,
    A rose that breaks at a breath and falls to your feet,
    The fickle moon--Oh, hide me from the world;
    For there they say love goes by the same law!
    Let me be outlawed then. I cannot change.
    Sweetheart, sweetheart, Prince John will hunt me down!
    Prince John--Queen Elinor will hunt me down!

    ROBIN

    Queen Elinor! Nay, but tell me what this means?
    How came you here?

    MARIAN

                        The Queen--she came last night,
    Made it an odious kind of praise to me
    That he, not three months wedded to his bride,
    Should--pah!
                     And then she said five hundred men
    Were watching round the borders of the wood;
    But she herself would take me safely through them,
    Said that I should be safer here with Robin,
    She had your name so pat--and I gave way.

    [_Enter QUEEN ELINOR behind. She conceals herself to listen._]

    ROBIN

    Marian, she might have trapped you to Prince John.

    MARIAN

    No; no; I think she wanted me to guide her
    Here to your hiding place. She wished to see you
    Herself, unknown to John, I know not why.
    It was my only way. Her skilful tongue
    Quite won my father over, made him think,
    Poor father, clinging to his lands again,
    He yet might save them. And so, without ado
    (It will be greatly to the joy of Much,
    Your funny little man), I bade my maid
    Jenny, go pack her small belongings up
    This morning, and to follow with Friar Tuck
    And Widow Scarlet. They'll be here anon.

    ROBIN

    Where did you leave the Queen?

    MARIAN

                                  Robin, she tried
    To kill me! We were deep within the wood
    And she began to tell me a wild tale,
    Saying that I reminded her of days
    When Robin was her page, and how you came
    To Court, a breath of April in her life,
    And how you worshipped her, and how she grew
    To love you. But she saw you loved me best
    (So would she mix her gall and lies with honey),
    So she would let you go. And then she tried
    To turn my heart against you, bade me think
    Of all the perils of your outlawry,
    Then flamed with anger when she found my heart
    Steadfast; and when I told her we drew nigh
    The cave, she bade me wait and let her come
    First, here, to speak with you. Some devil's trick
    Gleamed in her smile, the way some women have
    Of smiling with their lips, wreathing the skin
    In pleasant ripples, laughing with their teeth,
    While the cold eyes watch, cruel as a snake's
    That fascinates a bird. I'd not obey her.
    She whipped a dagger out. Had it not been
    For Shadow-of-a-Leaf, who dogged us all the way,
    Poor faithful fool, and leapt out at her hand,
    She would have killed me. Then she darted away
    Like a wild thing into the woods, trying to find
    Your hiding place most like.

    ROBIN

                                  O Marian, why,
    Why did you trust her? Listen, who comes here?

    [_Enter FRIAR TUCK, JENNY and WIDOW SCARLET._]

    Ah, Friar Tuck!

    MARIAN

                   Good Jenny!

    ROBIN

                              And Widow Scarlet!

    FRIAR TUCK

    O children, children, this is thirsty weather!
    The heads I have cracked, the ribs I have thwacked, the bones
    I have bashed with my good quarter-staff, to bring
    These bits of womankind through Sherwood Forest.

    ROBIN

    What, was there scuffling, friar?

    FRIAR TUCK

                                    Some two or three
    Pounced on us, ha! ha! ha!

    JENNY

                               A score at least,
    Mistress, most unchaste ruffians.

    FRIAR TUCK

                                     They've gone home,
    Well chastened by the Church. This pastoral staff
    Mine oaken _Pax Vobiscum_, sent 'em home
    To think about their sins, with watering eyes.
    You never saw a bunch of such blue faces,
    Bumpy and juicy as a bunch of grapes
    Bruised in a Bacchanalian orgy, dripping
    The reddest wine a man could wish to see.

    ROBIN

    I picture it--those big brown hands of thine
    Grape-gathering at their throttles, ha! ha! ha!
    Come, Widow Scarlet, come, look not so sad.

    WIDOW SCARLET

    O master, master, they have named the day
    For killing of my boy.

    ROBIN

                           They have named the day
    For setting of him free, then, my good dame.
    Be not afraid. We shall be there, eh, Friar?
    Grape-gathering, eh?

    FRIAR

                         Thou'lt not be there thyself.
    My son, the game's too dangerous now, methinks.

    ROBIN

    I shall be there myself. The game's too good
    To lose. We'll all be there. You're not afraid,
    Marian, to spend a few short hours alone
    Here in the woods with Jenny.

    MARIAN

                                  Not for myself,
    Robin.

    ROBIN

         We shall want every hand that day,
    And you'll be safe enough. You know we go
    Disguised as gaping yokels, old blind men,
    With patches on their eyes, poor wandering beggars,
    Pedlars with pins and poking-sticks to sell;
    And when the time is come--a merry blast
    Rings out upon a bugle and suddenly
    The Sheriff is aware that Sherwood Forest
    Has thrust its green boughs up beneath his feet.
    Off go the cloaks and all is Lincoln green,
    Great thwacking clubs and twanging bows of yew.
    Oh, we break up like nature thro' the laws
    Of that dark world; and then, good Widow Scarlet,
    Back to the cave we come and your good Will
    Winds his big arm about you once again.
    Go, Friar, take her in and make her cosy.
    Jenny, your Much will grow three feet at least
    With joy to welcome you. He is in the cave.

    [_FRIAR TUCK and WIDOW SCARLET go towards the cave._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    Now for a good bowse at a drinking can.
    I've got one cooling in the cave, unless
    That rascal, Little John, has drunk it all.

    [_Exeunt into cave._]

    JENNY

    [_To MARIAN._]

    Mistress, I haven't spoke a word to you
    For nigh three hours. 'Tis most unkind, I think.

    MARIAN

    Go, little tyrant, and be kind to Much.

    JENNY

    Mistress, it isn't Much I want. Don't think
    Jenny comes trapesing through these awful woods
    For Much. I haven't spoke a word with you
    For nigh three hours. 'Tis most unkind, I think.

    MARIAN

    Wait, Jenny, then, I'll come and talk with you.
    Robin, she is a tyrant; but she loves me.
    And if I do not go, she'll pout and sulk
    Three days on end. But she's a wondrous girl.
    She'd work until she dropped for me. Poor Jenny!

    ROBIN

    That's a quaint tyranny. Go, dear Marian, go;
    But not for long. We have so much to say.
    Come quickly back.

    [_Exit MARIAN. ROBIN paces thoughtfully across the glade._

    _QUEEN ELINOR steals out of her hiding place and
    stands before him._]

                     You here!

    ELINOR

                              Robin, can you
    Believe that girl? Am I so treacherous?

    ROBIN

    It seems you have heard whate'er I had to say.

    ELINOR

    Surely you cannot quite forget those days
    When you were kind to me. Do you remember
    The sunset through that oriel?

    ROBIN

                                      Ay, a god
    Grinning thro' a horse-collar at a pitiful page,
    Dazed with the first red gleam of what he thought
    Life, as the trouveres find it! I am ashamed,
    Remembering how your quick tears blinded me!


    ELINOR

    Ashamed! You--you--that in my bitter grief
    When Rosamund--

    ROBIN

                        I know! I thought your woes,
    Those tawdry relics of your treacheries,
    Wrongs quite unparalleled. I would have fought
    Roland himself to prove you spotless then.

    ELINOR

    Oh, you speak thus to me! Robin, beware!
    I have come to you, I have trampled on my pride,
    Set all on this one cast! If you should now
    Reject me, humble me to the dust before
    That girl, beware! I never forget, I warn you;
    I never forgive.

    ROBIN

                          Are you so proud of that?

    ELINOR

    Ah, well, forgive me, Robin. I'll save you yet
    From all these troubles of your outlawry!
    Trust me--for I can wind my poor Prince John
    Around my little finger. Who knows--with me
    To help you--there are but my two sons' lives
    That greatly hinder it--why, yourself might reign
    Upon the throne of England.

    ROBIN

                              Are you so wrapped
    In treacheries, helplessly false, even to yourself,
    That now you do not know falsehood from truth,
    Darkness from light?

    ELINOR

                              O Robin, I was true
    At least to you. If I were false to others,
    At least I--

    ROBIN

                          No--not that--that sickening plea
    Of truth in treachery. Treachery cannot live
    With truth. The soul wherein they are wedded dies
    Of leprosy.

    ELINOR

    [_Coming closer to him._]

                            Have you no pity, Robin,
    No kinder word than this for the poor creature
    That crept--Ah, feel my heart, feel how it beats!
    No pity?

    ROBIN

          Five years ago this might have moved me!

    ELINOR

    No pity?

    ROBIN

                    None. There is no more to say.
    My men shall guide you safely through the wood.

    ELINOR

    I never forgive!

    [_Enter MARIAN from the cave; she stands silent and startled._]

    ROBIN

                    My men shall guide you back.

    [_Calls._]

    Ho, there, my lads!

    [_Enter several of the OUTLAWS._]

                        This lady needs a guide
    Back thro' the wood.

    ELINOR

    Good-bye, then, Robin, and good-bye to you,
    Sweet mistress! You have wronged me! What of that?
    For--when we meet--Come, lead on, foresters!

    [_Exeunt the QUEEN and her guides._]

    MARIAN

    O Robin, Robin, how the clouds begin
    To gather--how that woman seems to have brought
    A nightmare on these woods.

    ROBIN

                                  Forget it all!
    She is so tangled in those lies the world
    Draws round some men and women, none can help her.
    Marian, for God's sake, let us quite forget
    That nightmare! Oh, that perfect brow of yours,
    Those perfect eyes, pure as the violet wells
    That only mirror heaven and are not dimmed
    Except by clouds that drift thro' heaven and catch
    God's glory in the sunset and the dawn.

    MARIAN

    It is enough for them simply to speak
    The love they hold for you. But--I still fear.
    Robin--think you--she might have overheard
    Your plan--the rescue of Will Scarlet?

    ROBIN

                                              Why--
    No--No--some time had passed, and yet--she seemed
    To have heard your charge against her! No, she guessed it.
    Come--let us brush these cobwebs from our minds.
    Look how the first white star begins to tremble
    Like a big blossom in that sycamore.
    Now you shall hear our forest ritual.
    Ho, Little John! Summon the lads together!

    [_The OUTLAWS come out of the cave. LITTLE JOHN blows a bugle
    and others come in from the forest._]

    Friar, read us the rules.

    FRIAR TUCK

                                  First, shall no man
    Presume to call our Robin Hood or any
    By name of Earl, lord, baron, knight or squire,
    But simply by their names as men and brothers:
    Second, that Lady Marian while she shares
    Our outlaw life in Sherwood shall be called
    Simply Maid Marian. Thirdly, we that follow
    Robin, shall never in thought or word or deed
    Do harm to widow, wife or maid; but hold,
    Each, for his mother's or sister's or sweetheart's sake,
    The glory of womanhood, a sacred thing,
    A star twixt earth and heaven. Fourth, whomsoever
    Ye meet in Sherwood ye shall bring to dine
    With Robin, saving carriers, posts and folk
    That ride with food to serve the market towns
    Or any, indeed, that serve their fellow men.
    Fifth, you shall never do the poor man wrong,
    Nor spare a priest or usurer. You shall take
    The waste wealth of the rich to help the poor,
    The baron's gold to stock the widow's cupboard,
    The naked ye shall clothe, the hungry feed,
    And lastly shall defend with all your power
    All that are trampled under by the world,
    The old, the sick and all men in distress.

    ROBIN

    So, if it be no dream, we shall at last
    Hasten the kingdom of God's will on earth.
    There shall be no more talk of rich and poor,
    Norman and Saxon. We shall be one people,
    One family, clustering all with happy hands
    And faces round that glowing hearth, the sun.
    Now let the bugle sound a golden challenge
    To the great world. Greenleaf, a forest call!

    [_REYNOLD GREENLEAF blows a resounding call._]

    Now let the guards be set; and then, to sleep!
    To-morrow there'll be work enough for all.
    The hut for Jenny and Maid Marian!
    Come, you shall see how what we lack in halls
    We find in bowers. Look how from every branch
    Such tapestries as kings could never buy
    Wave in the starlight. You'll be waked at dawn
    By feathered choirs whose notes were taught in heaven.

    MUCH

    Come, Jenny, come, we must prepare the hut
    For Mistress Marian. Here's a bundle of ferns!

    [_They go into the hut. The light is growing dimmer and richer._]

    LITTLE JOHN

    And here's a red cramoisy cloak, a baron

    [_Handing them in at the door._]

    Dropt, as he fled one night from Robin Hood;
    And here's a green, and here's a midnight blue,
    All soft as down. But wait, I'll get you more.

    [_Two of the Outlaws appear at the door with deerskins. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF
    stands behind them with a great bunch of
    flowers and ferns._]

    FIRST OUTLAW

    Here's fawn-skins, milder than a maiden's cheek.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Oh, you should talk in rhyme! The world should sing
    Just for this once in tune, if Love were king!

    SECOND OUTLAW

    Here's deer-skins, for a carpet, smooth and meek.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    I knew you would! Ha! ha! Now look at what I bring!

    [_He throws flowers into the hut, spray by spray, speaking in a
    kind of ecstasy._]

    Here's lavender and love and sweet wild thyme,
    And dreams and blue-bells that the fairies chime,
    Here's meadow-sweet and moonlight, bound in posies,
    With ragged robin, traveller's joy and roses,
    And here--just three leaves from a weeping willow;
    And here--that's best--deep poppies for your pillow.

    MUCH

    And here's a pillow that I made myself,
    Stuffed with dry rose-leaves and grey pigeon's down,
    The softest thing on earth except my heart!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Going aside and throwing himself down among the ferns to watch._]

    Just three sweet breaths and then the song is flown!

    [_MUCH looks at him for a moment with a puzzled face, then turns to the hut
    again._]

    MUCH

    Jenny, here, take it--though I'm fond of comforts,
    Take it and give it to Maid Marian.

    JENNY

    Why, Much, 'tis bigger than thyself.

    MUCH

                                      Hush, child.
    I meant to use it lengthways. 'Twould have made
    A feather-bed complete for your poor Much,
    Take it!

    [_The OUTLAWS all go into the cave._]

    MARIAN

            O Robin, what a fairy palace!
    How cold and grey the walls of castles seem
    Beside your forest's fragrant halls and bowers.
    I do not think that I shall be afraid
    To sleep this night, as I have often been
    Beneath our square bleak battlements.

    ROBIN

                                        And look,
    Between the boughs, there is your guard, all night,
    That great white star, white as an angel's wings,
    White as the star that shone on Bethlehem!
    Good-night, sweetheart, good-night!

    MARIAN

                                      Good-night!

    ROBIN

                                                One kiss!
    Oh, clear bright eyes, dear heavens of sweeter stars,
    Where angels play, and your own sweeter soul
    Smiles like a child into the face of God,
    Good-night! Good-night!

    [_MARIAN goes into the hut. The door is shut. ROBIN goes to
    the mouth of the cave and throws himself down on a
    couch of deerskins. The light grows dimly rich and
    fairy-like._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Rising to his knees._]

                                 Here comes the little cloud!

    [_A little moonlit cloud comes floating down between the tree-tops
    into the glade. TITANIA is seen reposing upon it. She
    steps to earth. The cloud melts away._]

    How blows the wind from fairyland, Titania?

    TITANIA

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the wicked queen has heard
    Your master's plan for saving poor Will Scarlet.
    She knows Maid Marian will be left alone,
    Unguarded in these woods. The wicked Prince
    Will steal upon her loneliness. He plots
    To carry her away.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                          What can we do?
    Can I not break my fairy vows and tell?

    TITANIA

                  No, no; you cannot, even if you would,
    Convey our fairy lore to mortal ears.
    When have they heard our honeysuckle bugles
    Blowing reveille to the crimson dawn?
    We can but speak by dreams; and, if you spoke,
    They'd whip you, for your words would all ring false
    Like sweet bells out of tune.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                  What can we do?

    TITANIA

    Nothing, except on pain of death, to stay
    The course of Time and Tide. There's Oberon!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Oberon!

    TITANIA

                 He can tell you more than I.

    [_Enter OBERON._]

    OBERON

    Where's Orchis? Where's our fairy trumpeter
    To call the court together?

    ORCHIS

                                Here, my liege.

    OBERON

    Bugle them hither; let thy red cheeks puff
    Until thy curled petallic trumpet thrill
    More loudly than a yellow-banded bee
    Thro' all the clover clumps and boughs of thyme.
    They are scattered far abroad.

    ORCHIS

                                  My liege, it shall
    Outroar the very wasp!

    [_Exit._]

    OBERON

    [_As he speaks, the fairies come flocking from all sides into the
    glade._]

                            Methinks they grow
    Too fond of feasting. As I passed this way
    I saw the fairy halls of hollowed oaks
    All lighted with their pale green glow-worm lamps.
    And under great festoons of maiden-hair
    Their brilliant mushroom tables groaned with food.
    Hundreds of rose-winged fairies banqueted!
    All Sherwood glittered with their prismy goblets
    Brimming the thrice refined and luscious dew
    Not only of our own most purplest violets,
    But of strange fragrance, wild exotic nectars,
    Drawn from the fairy blossoms of some star
    Beyond our tree-tops! Ay, beyond that moon
    Which is our natural limit--the big lamp
    Heaven lights upon our boundary.

    ORCHIS

                                    Mighty King,
    The Court is all attendant on thy word.

    OBERON

    [_With great dignity._]

    Elves, pixies, nixies, gnomes and leprechauns,

    [_He pauses._]

    We are met, this moonlight, for momentous councils
    Concerning those two drowsy human lovers,
    Maid Marian and her outlawed Robin Hood.
    They are in dire peril; yet we may not break
    Our vows of silence. Many a time
    Has Robin Hood by kindly words and deeds
    Done in his human world, sent a new breath
    Of life and joy like Spring to fairyland;
    And at the moth-hour of this very dew-fall,
    He saved a fairy, whom he thought, poor soul,
    Only a may-fly in a spider's web,
    He saved her from the clutches of that Wizard,
    That Cruel Thing, that dark old Mystery,
    Whom ye all know and shrink from--

    [_Exclamations of horror from the fairies._]

                                      Plucked her forth,
    So gently that not one bright rainbow gleam
    Upon her wings was clouded, not one flake
    Of bloom brushed off--there lies the broken web.
    Go, look at it; and here is pale Perilla
    To tell you all the tale.

    [_The fairies cluster to look at the web, etc._]

    A FAIRY

                             Can we not make them free
    Of fairyland, like Shadow-of-a-Leaf, to come
    And go, at will, upon the wings of dreams?

    OBERON

    Not till they lose their wits like Shadow-of-a-Leaf.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Can I not break my fairy vows and tell?

    OBERON

    Only on pain of what we fairies call
    Death!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

          Death?

    OBERON

                  Never to join our happy revels,
    Never to pass the gates of fairyland
    Again, but die like mortals. What that means
    We do not know--who knows?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                If I could save them!--
    I am only Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    OBERON

                                There is a King
    Beyond the seas. If he came home in time,
    All might be well. We fairies only catch
    Stray gleams, wandering shadows of things to come.

    TITANIA

    Oh, if the King came home from the Crusade!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Why will he fight for graves beyond the sea?

    OBERON

    Our elfin couriers brought the news at dusk
    That Lion-Heart, while wandering home thro' Europe,
    In jet-black armour, like an errant knight,
    Despite the great red cross upon his shield,
    Was captured by some wicked prince and thrust
    Into a dungeon. Only a song, they say,
    Can break those prison-bars. There is a minstrel
    That loves his King. If he should roam the world
    Singing until from that dark tower he hears
    The King reply, the King would be set free.

    TITANIA

    Only a song, only a minstrel?

    OBERON

                                Ay;
    And Blondel is his name.

    [_A long, low sound of wailing is heard in the distance. The
    fairies shudder and creep together._]

    TITANIA

                            Hark, what is that?

    OBERON

    The cry of the poor, the cry of the oppressed,
    The sound of women weeping for their children,
    The victims of the forest laws. The moan
    Of that dark world where mortals live and die
    Sweeps like an icy wind thro' fairyland.
    And oh, it may grow bitterer yet, that sound!
    'Twas Merlin's darkest prophecy that earth
    Should all be wrapped in smoke and fire, the woods
    Hewn down, the flowers discoloured and the sun
    Begrimed, until the rows of lifeless trees
    Against the greasy sunset seemed no more
    Than sooty smudges of an ogre's thumbs
    Upon the sweating forehead of a slave.
    While, all night long, fed with the souls of men,
    And bodies, too, great forges blast and burn
    Till the great ogre's cauldrons brim with gold.

    [_The wailing sound is heard again in the distance._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                      To be shut out for ever, only to hear
    Those cries! I am only Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the fool,
    I cannot face it! Is there no hope but this?
    No hope for Robin and Maid Marian?

    OBERON

    If the great King comes home from the Crusade
    In time! If not,--there is another King
    Beyond the world, they say.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                  Death, that dark death!
    To leave the sunlight and the flowers for ever!
    I cannot bear it! Oh, I cannot tell them.
    I'll wait--perhaps the great King will come home,
    If not--Oh, hark, a wandering minstrel's voice?

    OBERON

    Who is drawing hither? Listen, fairies, listen!

    [_Song heard approaching thro' the wood._]

              Knight on the narrow way,
                Where wouldst thou ride?
              "Onward," I heard him say,
                "Love, to thy side!"

              "Nay," sang a bird above;
                "Stay, for I see
              Death in the mask of love,
                Waiting for thee."

    [_The song breaks off. Enter a MINSTREL, leading a great white
    steed. He pauses, confronted by the fairy host. The
    moonlight dazzles him._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Minstrel, art thou, too, free of fairyland?
    Where wouldst thou ride? What is thy name?

    MINSTREL

                                                My name
    Is Blondel.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

              Blondel!

    THE FAIRIES

                      Blondel!

    MINSTREL

                                And I ride
    Through all the world to seek and find my King!

    [_He passes through the fairy host and goes into the woods on the
    further side of the glade, continuing his song, which
    dies away in the distance._]

                       [_Song._]
                "Death? What is death?" he cried.
                  "I must ride on,
                On to my true love's side,
                  Up to her throne!"

                       [_Curtain._]




ACT III


SCENE I. _May-day. An open place (near NOTTINGHAM). A crowd of rustics
and townsfolk assembling to see the execution of WILL SCARLET._

    FIRST RUSTIC

    A sad may-day! Where yonder gallows glowers,
    We should have raised the may-pole.

    SECOND RUSTIC

                                      Ay, no songs,
    No kisses in the ring, no country dances
    To-day; no lads and lasses on the green,
    Crowning their queen of may.

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD, disguised as an old beggar, with a green
    patch on one eye._]

    ROBIN

                                  Is this the place,
    Masters, where they're a-goin' to hang Will Scarlet?

    FIRST RUSTIC

    Ay, father, more's the pity.

    ROBIN

                                Eh! Don't ye think
    There may be scuffling, masters? There's a many
    That seems to like him well, here, roundabouts.

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Too many halberts round him. There's no chance.

    ROBIN

    I've heard the forest might break out, the lads
    In Lincoln green, you wot of! If they did?

    FIRST RUSTIC

    There's many here would swing a cudgel and help
    To trip the Sheriff up. If Robin Hood
    Were only here! But then he's outlawed now.

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ay, and there's big rewards out. It would be
    Sure death for him to try a rescue now.
    The biggest patch of Lincoln Green we'll see
    This day, is that same patch on thy old eye,
    Eh, lads!

    THIRD RUSTIC

                  What's more, they say Prince John is out
    This very day, scouring thro' Sherwood forest
    In quest of Lady Marian!

    ROBIN

    [_Sharply._]

                              You heard that?

    THIRD RUSTIC

    Ay, for they say she's flown to Sherwood forest.

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ah! Ah? That's why he went. I saw Prince John!
    With these same eyes I saw him riding out
    To Sherwood, not an hour ago.

    ROBIN

                                  You saw him?

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ay, and he only took three men at arms.

    FIRST RUSTIC

    Three men at arms! Why then, he must ha' known
    That Robin's men would all be busy here!
    He's none so bold, he would not risk his skin!
    I think there'll be some scuffling after all.

    ROBIN

    Ay, tell 'em so--go, spread it thro' the crowd!

                        [_He mutters to himself._]

    He'd take some time, to find her, but 'fore God
    We must be quick; 'fore God we must be quick!

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Why, father, one would never think to see thee
    Thou had'st so sound a heart!

    FIRST RUSTIC

                                  Ah, here they come!
    The Sheriff and his men; and, in the midst,
    There's poor Will Scarlet bound.

    THE CROWD MURMURS

                                    Ah, here they come!
    Look at the halberts shining! Can you see him?

    FIRST RUSTIC

    There, there he is. His face is white: but, Lord,
    He takes it bravely.

    SECOND RUSTIC

                        He's a brave man, Will.

    SHERIFF

    Back with the crowd there, guards; delay no time!

    SOME WOMEN IN THE CROWD

    Ah, ah, poor lad!

    ROBIN

    [_Eagerly._]

                    What are they doing now?
    I cannot see!

    FIRST RUSTIC

                 The Sheriff's angered now!

    SECOND RUSTIC

    Ay, for they say a messenger has come
    From that same godless hangman whose lean neck
    I'd like to twist, saying he is delayed.
    'Tis the first godly deed he has ever done.

    THIRD RUSTIC

    The Sheriff says he will not be delayed.
    But who will take the hangman's office?

    ROBIN

                                            Masters,
    I have a thought; make way; let me bespeak
    The Sheriff!

    RUSTICS

                  How now, father, what's to do?

    ROBIN

    Make way, I tell you. Here's the man they want!

    SHERIFF

    What's this?

    ROBIN

                  Good master Sheriff, I've a grudge
    Against Will Scarlet. Let me have the task
    Of sending him to heaven!

    CROWD

                              Ah-h-h, the old devil!

    SHERIFF

    Come on, then, and be brief!

    ROBIN

                                I'm not a hangman;
    But I can cleave your thinnest hazel wand
    At sixty yards.

    SHERIFF

                            Shoot, then, and make an end.
    Make way there, clear the way!

    [_An opening is made in the crowd. ROBIN stands in the gap,
    WILL SCARLET is not seen by the audience._]


    CROWD

                                    Ah-h-h, the old devil!

    ROBIN

    I'll shoot him one on either side, just graze him,
    To show you how I love him; then the third
    Slick in his heart.

    [_He shoots. A murmur goes up from the crowd. The crowd
    hides WILL SCARLET during the shooting. But ROBIN
    remains in full view, in the opening._]

    SHERIFF

    [_Angrily._]

                               Take care! You've cut the cord
    That bound him on that side!

    ROBIN

                                   Then here's the second!
    I will be careful!

    [_He takes a steady aim._]

    A RUSTIC TO HIS NEIGHBOURS

                               I' faith, lads, he can shoot!
    What do you think--that green patch on his eye
    Smacks of the merry men! He's tricking them!

    [_ROBIN shoots. A louder murmur goes up from the crowd._]

    SHERIFF

    You have cut the rope again!

    A CRY

                                He has cut him free!

    ROBIN

    All right! All right! It's just to tease the dog!
    Here's for the third now!

    [_He aims and shoots quickly. There is a loud cry of a wounded
    man; then a shout from the crowd._]

    THE CROWD

    Ah-h-h, he has missed; he has killed
    One of the guards!

    FIRST RUSTIC

                      What has he done?

    SECOND RUSTIC

                                        He has killed
    One of the Sheriff's men!

    SHERIFF

                              There's treachery here!
    I'll cleave the first man's heart that moves!

    ROBIN

                                                Will Scarlet,
    Pick up that dead man's halbert!

    SHERIFF

                                    Treachery! Help!
    Down with the villain!

    ROBIN

    [_Throws off his beggar's crouch and hurls the SHERIFF and several
    of his men back amongst the crowd. His cloak drops off._]

    Sherwood! A merry Sherwood!

    CROWD

    Ah! ha! The Lincoln Green! A Robin Hood!

    [_A bugle rings out and immediately some of the yokels throw off
    their disguise and the Lincoln green appears as by
    magic amongst the crowd. The guards are rushed and
    hustled by them. Robin and several of his men make
    a ring round WILL SCARLET._]

    SHERIFF

    It is the outlawed Earl of Huntingdon:
    There is a great reward upon his head.
    Down with him!

    [_The SHERIFF'S men make a rush at the little band. A KNIGHT
    in jet black armour, with a red-cross shield, suddenly appears
    and forces his way through the mob, sword in
    hand._]

    KNIGHT

                            What, so many against so few!
    Back, you wild wolves. Now, foresters, follow me,
    For our St. George and merry England, charge,
    Charge them, my lads!

    [_The FORESTERS make a rush with him and the SHERIFF and his
    men take to flight._]

    ROBIN

                             Now back to Sherwood, swiftly!
    A horse, or I shall come too late; a horse!

    [_He sees the KNIGHT in armour standing by his horse._]

    Your pardon, sir; our debt to you is great,
    Too great almost for thanks; but if you be
    Bound by the vows of chivalry, I pray you
    Lend me your charger; and my men will bring you
    To my poor home in Sherwood. There you'll find
    A most abundant gratitude.

    KNIGHT

                                  Your name?

    ROBIN

    Was Huntingdon; but now is Robin Hood.

    KNIGHT

    If I refuse?

    ROBIN

                  Then, sir, I must perforce
    Take it. I am an outlaw, but the law
    Of manhood still constrains me--'tis a matter
    Of life and death--

    KNIGHT

                        Take it and God be with you!
    I'll follow you to Sherwood with your men.

    [_ROBIN seizes the horse, leaps to the saddle, and gallops away._]

    [_Curtain._]


SCENE II. _Sherwood Forest. Outside the cave. JENNY, MARIAN and WIDOW
SCARLET._

    MARIAN

    This dreadful waiting! How I wish that Robin
    Had listened to the rest and stayed with me.
    How still the woods are! Jenny, do you think
    There will be fighting? Oh, I am selfish, mother;
    You need not be afraid. Robin will bring
    Will Scarlet safely back to Sherwood. Why,
    Perhaps they are all returning even now!
    Cheer up! How long d'you think they've been away,
    Jenny, six hours or more? The sun is high,
    And all the dew is gone.

    JENNY

                            Nay, scarce three hours.
    Now don't you keep a-fretting. They'll be back,
    Quite soon enough. I've scarcely spoke with you,
    This last three days and more; and even now
    It seems I cannot get you to myself,
    Two's quite enough.

    [_To WIDOW SCARLET._]


                        Come, widow, come with me.
    I'll give you my own corner in the hut
    And make you cosy. If you take a nap
    Will Scarlet will be here betimes you wake.

    [_Takes her to the hut and shuts her in._]

    There, drat her, for a mumping mumble-crust!

    MARIAN

    Come, Jenny, that's too bad; the poor old dame
    Is lonely.

    JENNY

                She's not lonely when she sleeps,
    And if I never get you to myself
    Where was the good of trapesing after you
    And living here in Sherwood like wild rabbits?
    You ha'nt so much as let me comb your hair
    This last three days and more.

    MARIAN

                                  Well, comb it, Jenny,
    Now, if you like, and comb it all day long;
    But don't get crabbed, and don't speak so crossly!

    [_JENNY begins loosening MARIAN'S hair and combing it._]

    JENNY

    Why, Mistress, it grows longer every day.
    It's far below your knees, and how it shines!
    And wavy, just like Much the Miller's brook,
    Where it comes tumbling out into the sun,
    Like gold, red gold.

    MARIAN

                        Ah, that's provoking, Jenny,
    For you forgot to bring me my steel glass,
    And, if you chatter so, I shall soon want it.

    JENNY

    I've found a very good one at a pinch.
    There's a smooth silver pool, down in the stream,
    Where you can see your face most beautiful.

    MARIAN

    So that's how Jenny spends her lonely hours,
    A sad female Narcissus, while poor Much
    Dwines to an Echo!

    JENNY

                      I don't like those gods.
    I never cared for them. But, as for Much,
    Much is the best of all the merry men.
    And, mistress, O, he speaks so beautifully,
    It _might_ be just an Echo from blue hills
    Far, far away! You see he's quite a scholar:
    Much, more an' most (That's what he calls the three
    Greasy caparisons--much, more an' most)!
    You see they thought that being so very small
    They could not make him grow to be a man,
    They'd make a scholar of him instead. The Friar
    Taught him his letters. He can write his name,
    And mine, and yours, just like a missal book,
    In lovely colours; and he always draws
    The first big letter of JENNY like a tree
    With naked Cupids hiding in the branches.
    Mistress, I don't believe you hear one word
    I ever speak to you! Your eyes are always
    That far and far away.

    MARIAN

                          I'm listening, Jenny!

    JENNY

    Well, when he draws the first big M of yours,
    He makes it like a bridge from earth to heaven,
    With white-winged angels passing up and down;
    And, underneath the bridge, in a black stream,
    He puts the drowning face of the bad Prince
    Holding his wicked hands out, while a devil
    Stands on the bank and with a pointed stake
    Keeps him from landing--
                          Ah, what's that? What's that?

    MARIAN

    O Jenny, how you startled me!

    JENNY

                                 I thought
    I saw that same face peering thro' the ferns
    Yonder--there--see, they are shaking still.

    [_She screams._]

                                                Ah! Ah!

    [_PRINCE JOHN and another man appear advancing across the
    glade._]

    JOHN

    So here's my dainty tigress in her den,
    And--Warman--there's a pretty scrap for you
    Beside her. Now, sweet mistress, will you deign
    To come with me, to change these cheerless woods
    For something queenlier? If I be not mistaken,
    You have had time to tire of that dark cave.
    Was I not right, now? Surely you can see
    Those tresses were not meant to waste their gold
    Upon this desert. Nay, but Marian, hear me.
    I do not jest.

    [_At a sign from MARIAN, JENNY goes quickly inside the cave._]

                 That's well! Dismiss your maid!
    Warman, remove a little.

    [_His man retires._]

                            I see you think
    A little better of me! Out in the wood
    There waits a palfrey for you, and the stirrup
    Longs, as I long, to clasp your dainty foot.
    I am very sure by this you must be tired
    Of outlawry, a lovely maid like you.

    [_He draws nearer._]

    MARIAN

    Wait--I must think, must think.

    JOHN

                                  Give me your hand!
    Why do you shrink from me? If you could know
    The fire that burns me night and day, you would not
    Refuse to let me snatch one cooling kiss
    From that white hand of yours.

    MARIAN

                                  If you be prince,
    You will respect my loneliness and go.

    JOHN

    How can I leave you, when by day and night
    I see that face of yours.
    I'll not pretend
    I do not love you, do not long for you,
    Desire and hunger for your kiss, your touch!
    I'll not pretend to be a saint, you see!
    I hunger and thirst for you. Marian, Marian.

    MARIAN

    You are mad!

    JOHN

                  Ay, mad for you.
    Body and soul
    I am broken up with love for you. Your eyes
    Flash like the eyes of a tigress, and I love them
    The better for it.
    Ah, do not shrink from me!

    [_JENNY comes out of the cave and hands MARIAN a bow. She
    leaps back and aims it at JOHN._]

    MARIAN

    Back, you wild beast, or by the heaven above us,
    I'll kill you! Now, don't doubt me. I can shoot
    Truly as any forester. I swear,
    Prince or no prince, king or no king, I'll kill you
    If you should stir one step from where you stand.

    JOHN

    Come, come, sweet Marian, put that weapon down.
    I was beside myself, was carried away.
    I cannot help my love for--

    MARIAN

                                  I'll not hear
    Another sickening word: throw down your arms,
    That dagger at your side.

    JOHN

                              Oh, that's too foolish,
    Marian, I swear--

    MARIAN

                      You see that rusty stain
    Upon the silver birch down yonder? Watch.

    [_She shoots. Then swiftly aims at him again._]

    Now, throw your weapon down.

    [_He pulls out the dagger and throws it down, with a shrug of his
    shoulders. One of his men steals up behind MARIAN._]

    JENNY

                              Ah, Mistress Marian,
    There's one behind you! Look!

    [_The man springs forward and seizes MARIAN'S arms._]

    JOHN

    [_Coming forward and taking hold of her also._]

                                   So, my sweet tigress,
    You're trapped then, are you? Well, we'll waste no time!
    We'll talk this over when we reach the castle.
    Keep off the maid, there, Warman; I can manage
    This turbulent beauty. Ah, by God, you shall
    Come! Ah? God's blood, what's this?

    [_MARIAN has succeeded in drawing her dagger and slightly wounding
    him. She wrests herself free._]

    MARIAN

                                       Keep back, I warn you!

    JOHN

    [_Advancing slowly._]

    Strike, now strike if you will. You will not like
    To see the red blood spurting up your hand.
    That's not maid's work. Come, strike!

    [_ROBIN HOOD appears at the edge of the glade behind him_]

                                          You see, you cannot!
    Your heart is tenderer than you think.

    ROBIN

    [_Quietly._]

                                          Prince John!

    JOHN

    [_Turns round and confronts ROBIN._]

    Out with your blade, Warman; call up the rest!
    We can strike freely now, without a fear
    Of marring the sweet beauty of the spoil.
    We four can surely make an end of him.
    Have at him, lads, and swiftly, or the thieves
    Will all be down on us.

    [_ROBIN draws his sword and sets his back to an oak. The other
    two followers of PRINCE JOHN come out of the wood._]

    ROBIN

                            Come on, all four!
    This oak will shift its roots before I budge
    One inch from four such howling wolves. Come on;
    You must be tired of fighting women-folk.
    Come on! By God, sir, you must guard your head
    Better than that,

    [_He disarms WARMAN._]

                    Or you're just food for worms
    Already; come, you dogs!

    PRINCE JOHN

                            Work round, you three,
    Behind him! Drive him out from that damned oak!

    ROBIN

    Oh, that's a princely speech! Have at you, sir!

    [_He strikes PRINCE JOHN'S sword out of his hand and turns suddenly
    to confront the others. JOHN picks up a dagger
    and makes as if to stab ROBIN in the back. At the same
    instant, bugles are heard in the distance. The red-cross
    knight flashes between the trees and seizing JOHN'S arm
    in his gauntleted hand, disarms him, then turns to help
    ROBIN._]

    KNIGHT

    What, four on one! Down with your blades, you curs,
    Or, by Mahound!--

    [_The three men take to flight. JOHN stands staring at the newcomer.
    The FORESTERS appear, surrounding the
    glade._]

    JOHN

    [_Muttering._]

                      What? Thou? Thou? Or his ghost?
    No--no--it cannot be.

    ROBIN

                        Let them yelp home,
    The pitiful jackals. They have left behind
    The prime offender. Ha, there, my merry lads,
    All's well; but take this villain into the cave
    And guard him there.

    [_The FORESTERS lead PRINCE JOHN into the cave._]

    JOHN

    [_To the FORESTERS._]

                        Answer me one thing: who
    Is yonder red-cross knight?

    A FORESTER

                              No friend of thine,
    Whoe'er he be!

    KNIGHT

    [_To ROBIN._]

                  I need not ask _his_ name.
    I grieve to know it!

    ROBIN

                        Sir, I am much beholden
    To your good chivalry. What thanks is mine
    To give, is all your own.

    KNIGHT

                                Then I ask this!
    Give me that prisoner! I think his life is mine.

    ROBIN

    You saved my own, and more, you saved much more
    Than my poor life is worth. But, sir, think well!
    This man is dangerous, not to me alone,
    But to the King of England; for he'll yet
    Usurp the throne! Think well!

    KNIGHT

                                  I ask no more.
    I have more reasons than you know.

    ROBIN

                                    So be it.
    Ho! Bring the prisoner back!

    [_The FORESTERS bring PRINCE JOHN back. He stares at
    the KNIGHT as if in fear._]

                                 Sir, you shall judge him.
    This prisoner is your own.

    KNIGHT

                              Then--let him go!

    FORESTERS

    What! Set him free?

    ROBIN

                     Obey!

    [_They release PRINCE JOHN._]

    KNIGHT

                              Out of my sight;
    Go!

    PRINCE JOHN

              What man is this?

    KNIGHT

                              Quickly, get thee gone!

[_PRINCE JOHN goes out, shaken and white._]

    ROBIN

    We'll think no more of him! It is our rule
    That whomsoe'er we meet in merry greenwood
    Should dine with us. Will you not be our guest?

    KNIGHT

    That's a most happy thought! I have not heard
    A merrier word than dinner all this day.
    I am well-nigh starved.

    ROBIN

                          Will you not raise your visor
    And let us know to whose good knightly hand
    We are so beholden?

    KNIGHT

                        Sir, you will pardon me,
    If, for a little, I remain unknown.
    But, tell me, are you not that Robin Hood
    Who breaks the forest laws?

    ROBIN

                                That is my name.
    We hold this earth as naturally our own
    As the glad common air we breathe. We think
    No man, no king, can so usurp the world
    As not to give us room to live free lives,
    But, if you shrink from eating the King's deer--

    KNIGHT

    Shrink? Ha! ha! ha! I count it as my own!

    [_The FORESTERS appear, preparing the dinner on a table of green
    turfs, beneath a spreading oak. MARIAN and JENNY
    appear at the door of the hut. JENNY goes across to help
    at the preparations for dinner._]

    ROBIN

    Ah, there's my Lady Marian! Will you not come
    And speak with her?

    [_He and the KNIGHT go and talk to MARIAN in the background._]

    LITTLE JOHN

                    [_At the table._]
                        The trenchers all are set;
    Manchets of wheat, cream, curds and honey-cakes,
    Venison pasties, roasted pigeons! Much,
    Run to the cave; we'll broach our rarest wine
    To-day. Old Much is waiting for thee there
    To help him. He is growling roundly, too,
    At thy delay.

    MUCH

                    [_Going towards the cave._]

                  Ah me, my poor old father!

    JENNY

    I've dressed the salt and strawed the dining hall
    With flowers.

    [_Enter FRIAR TUCK with several more FORESTERS and WILL
    SCARLET._]

    ROBIN

                  Ah, good Will Scarlet, here at last!

    FRIAR TUCK

    We should ha' been here sooner; but these others
    Borrowed a farmer's market cart and galloped
    Ahead of us!

    ROBIN

                          Thy mother is in the hut,
    Sheer broken down with hope and fearfulness,
    Waiting and trembling for thee, Will. Go in,
    Put thy big arm around her.

    [_WILL SCARLET goes into the hut with a cry._]

    SCARLET

                                Mother!

    FRIAR TUCK

                                      You see,
    My sons, you couldn't expect the lad to run!
    There is a certain looseness in the limbs,
    A quaking of the flesh that overcomes
    The bravest who has felt a hangman's rope
    Cuddling his neck.

    ROBIN

                        You judge him by the rope
    That cuddles your slim waist! Oh, you sweet armful,
    Sit down and pant! I warrant you were glad
    To bear him company.

    FRIAR TUCK

                          I'll not deny it!
    I am a man of solids. Like the Church,
    I am founded on a rock.

    [_He sits down._]

    ROBIN

                         Solids, i' faith!
    Sir, it is true he is partly based on beef;
    He grapples with it squarely; but fluids, too,
    Have played their part in that cathedral choir
    He calls his throat. One godless virtue, sir,
    They seem to have given him. Never a nightingale
    Gurgles jug! jug! in mellower tones than he
    When jugs are flowing. Never a thrush can pipe
    Sweet, sweet, so rarely as, when a pipe of wine
    Summers his throttle, we'll make him sing to us
    One of his heathen ditties--_The Malmsey Butt_,
    Or _Down the Merry Red Lane!_

    FRIAR TUCK

                                     Oh, ay, you laugh,
    But, though I cannot run, when I am rested
    I'll challenge you, Robin, to a game of buffets,
    One fair, square, stand-up, stand-still, knock-down blow
    Apiece; you'll need no more. If you not kiss
    The turf, at my first clout, I will forego
    Malmsey for ever!

    ROBIN

                         Friar, I recant;
    You're champion there. Fists of a common size
    I will encounter; but not whirling hams
    Like thine!

    FRIAR TUCK

                 I knew it!

    JENNY

                   [_Approaching._]

                         Please you, sirs, all is ready!

    FRIAR TUCK

    Ah, Jenny, Jenny, Jenny, that's good news!

    [_WILL SCARLET comes out of the hut with his arm round his
    mother. They all sit down at the table of turfs. Enter
    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF timidly._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Is there a place for me?

    A FORESTER

                            Ay, come along!

    FRIAR TUCK

    Now, Robin, don't forget the grace, my son.

    ROBIN

    [_Standing up._]

    It is our custom, sir, since our repast
    Is borrowed from the King, to drain one cup
    To him, and his return from the Crusade,
    Before we dine. That same wine-bibbing friar
    Calls it our 'grace'; and constitutes himself
    Remembrancer--without a cause, for never
    Have we forgotten, never while bugles ring
    Thro' Sherwood, shall forget--Outlaws, the King!

    [_All stand up except the KNIGHT._]

    CRIES

    The King and his return from the Crusade!

    [_They drink and resume their seats._]

    ROBIN

    You did not drink the health, sir Knight. I hope
    You hold with Lion-Heart.

    KNIGHT

                          Yes; I hold with him.
    You were too quick for me. I had not drawn
    These gauntlets off.
                         But tell me, Lady Marian,
    When is your bridal day with Robin Hood?

    MARIAN

    We shall be wedded when the King comes home
    From the Crusade.

    KNIGHT

                         Ah, when the King comes home!
    That's music--all the birds of April sing
    In those four words for me--the King comes home.

    MARIAN

    I am glad you love him, sir.

    ROBIN

                         But you're not eating!
    Your helmet's locked and barred! Will you not raise
    Your visor?

    KNIGHT

    [_Laughs._]

                         Ha! ha! ha! You see I am trapped!
    I did not wish to raise it! Hunger and thirst
    Break down all masks and all disguises, Robin.

    [_He rises and removes his helmet, revealing the face of RICHARD
    COEUR DE LION._]

    ROBIN

    The King!

    [_They all leap to their feet._]

    OUTLAWS

                         The King! The King!

    ROBIN

                         But oh, my liege,
    I should have known, when we were hard beset
    Around Will Scarlet by their swarming bands,
    And when you rode out of the Eastern sky
    And hurled our foemen down, I should have known
    It was the King come home from the Crusade!
    And when I was beset here in the wood
    By treacherous hounds again, I should have known
    Whose armour suddenly burned between the leaves!
    I should have known, either it was St. George
    Or else the King come home from the Crusade!

    RICHARD

    Indeed there is one thing that might have told you,
    Robin--a lover's instinct, since it seems
    So much for you and Marian depends
    On my return.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                        Sire, you will pardon me,
    For I am only a fool, and yet methinks
    You know not half the meaning of those words--
    The King, the King comes home from the Crusade!
    Thrust up your swords, heft uppermost, my lads,
    And shout--the King comes home from the Crusade.

    [_He leaps on a seat, and thrusts up the King's sword, heft uppermost,
    as if it were a cross._]

    ROBIN

    Pardon him, sire, poor Shadow-of-a-Leaf has lost
    His wits!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

              That's what Titania said you'd say,
    Poor sweet bells out of tune! But oh, don't leave,
    Don't leave the forest! There's darker things to come!
    Don't leave the forest! I have wits enough at least
    To wrap my legs around my neck for warmth
    On winter nights.

    RICHARD

                      Well, you've no need to pass
    The winter in these woods--

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                        Oh, not _that_ winter!

    ROBIN

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, be silent!

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF goes aside and throws himself down sobbing
    among the ferns._]

    RICHARD

                              When even your cave
    Methinks can scarce be cheery. Huntingdon,
    Your earldom we restore to you this day!
    You and my Lady Marian shall return
    To Court with us, where your true bridal troth
    Shall be fulfilled with golden marriage bells.
    Now, friends, the venison pasty! We must hear
    _The Malmsey Butt_ and _Down the Merry Red Lane_,
    Ere we set out, at dawn, for London Town.

    ROBIN

    Allan-a-dale shall touch a golden string
    To speed our feast, sire, for he soars above
    The gross needs of the Churchman!

    RICHARD

                                    Allan-a-Dale?

    WILL SCARLET

    Our greenwood minstrel, sire! His harp is ours
    Because we won his bride for him.

    RICHARD

                                    His bride?

    REYNOLD GREENLEAF

    Was to be wedded, sire, against her will
    Last May, to a rich old baron.

    RICHARD

                                 Pigeon-pie--
    And Malmsey--yes--a rich old baron--tell!

    ROBIN

    Sire, on the wedding day, my merry men
    Crowded the aisles with uninvited guests;
    And, as the old man drew forth the golden ring,
    They threw aside their cloaks with one great shout
    Of 'Sherwood'; and, for all its crimson panes,
    The church was one wild sea of Lincoln green!
    The Forest had broken in, sire, and the bride
    Like a wild rose tossing on those green boughs,
    Was borne away and wedded here by Tuck
    To her true lover; and so--his harp is ours.

    ALLAN-A-DALE

    No feasting song, sire, but the royal theme
    Of chivalry--a song I made last night
    In yonder ruined chapel. It is called
    _The Old Knight's Vigil_.

    RICHARD

                         Our hearts will keep it young!

    [_ALLAN-A-DALE sings, SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF raises his head among the
    ferns._]

    [_Song._]

    I

    Once, in this chapel, Lord
      Young and undaunted,
    Over my virgin sword
      Lightly I chaunted,--
    "Dawn ends my watch. I go
    Shining to meet the foe!"

    II

    "Swift with thy dawn," I said,
      "Set the lists ringing!
    Soon shall thy foe be sped,
      And the world singing!
    Bless my bright plume for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF rises to his knees amongst the ferns._]

    III

    "War-worn I kneel to-night,
      Lord, by Thine altar!
    Oh, in to-morrow's fight,
      Let me not falter!
    Bless my dark arms for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    IV

    "Keep Thou my broken sword
      All the long night through
    While I keep watch and ward!
      Then--the red fight through,
    Bless the wrenched haft for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    V

    "Keep, in thy piercèd hands,
      Still the bruised helmet:
    Let not their hostile bands
      Wholly o'erwhelm it!
    Bless my poor shield for me,
    Christ, King of Chivalry.

    VI

    "Keep Thou the sullied mail,
      Lord, that I tender
    Here, at Thine altar-rail!
      Then--let Thy splendour
    Touch it once ... and I go
    Stainless to meet the foe."

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF rises to his feet and takes a step towards the
    minstrel._]

    [_Curtain._]




ACT IV


SCENE I. _Garden of the King's Palace. Enter JOHN and ELINOR._

    ELINOR

    You will be king the sooner! Not a month
    In England, and my good son Lion-Heart
    Must wander over-seas again. These two,
    Huntingdon and his bride, must bless the star
    Of errant knighthood.

    JOHN

                          He stayed just long enough
    To let them pass one fearless honeymoon
    In the broad sunlight of his royal favour,
    Then, like a meteor off goes great King Richard,
    And leaves them but the shadow of his name
    To shelter them from my revenge. They know it!
    I have seen her shiver like a startled fawn
    And draw him closer, damn him, as I passed.

    ELINOR

    They would have flitted to the woods again
    But for my Lord Fitzwalter.

    JOHN

                                That old fool
    Has wits enough to know I shall be king,
    And for his land's sake cheats himself to play
    Sir Pandarus of Troy. "'Tis wrong, dear daughter,
    To think such evil." Pah, he makes me sick!

    ELINOR

    Better to laugh. He is useful.

    JOHN

                                If I were king!
    If Richard were to perish over-seas!
    I'd--

    ELINOR

          You'd be king the sooner. Never fear:
    These wandering meteors flash into their graves
    Like lightning, and no thunder follows them
    To warn their foolish henchmen.

    JOHN

    [_Looking at her searchingly._]

                                  Shall I risk
    The King's return?

    ELINOR

                      What do you mean?

    JOHN

                                      I mean
    I cannot wait and watch this Robin Hood
    Dangle the fruit of Tantalus before me,
    Then eat it in my sight! I have borne enough!
    He gave me like a fairing to my brother
    In Sherwood Forest; and I now must watch him,
    A happy bridegroom with the happy bride,
    Whose lips I meant for mine.

    ELINOR

                                And do you think
    I love to see it?

    JOHN

                        Had it not been for you
    He would have died ere this!

    ELINOR

                                Then let him die!

    JOHN

    Oh, ay, but do you mean it, mother?

    ELINOR

                                      God,
    I hate him, hate him!

    JOHN

                            Mother, he goes at noon
    To Sherwood Forest, with a bag of gold
    For some of his old followers. If, by chance
    He fall--how saith the Scripture?--among thieves
    And vanish--is not heard of any more,
    I think Suspicion scarce could lift her head
    Among these roses here to hiss at me,
    When Lion-Heart returns.

    ELINOR

                            Vanish?

    JOHN

                                  I would not
    Kill him too quickly. I would have him taken
    To a dungeon that I know.

    ELINOR

                              You have laid your trap
    Already? Tell me. You need not be afraid!
    I saw them kiss, in the garden, yesternight;
    And I have wondered, ever since, if fire
    Could make a brand quite hot enough to stamp
    My hate upon him.

    JOHN

                        Well, then, I will tell you--
    The plan is laid; and, if his bag of gold
    Rejoice one serf to-day, then I'll resign
    Maid Marian to his loving arms for ever.
    But you must help me, mother, or she'll suspect.
    Do not let slip your mask of friendliness,
    As I have feared. Look--there our lovers come
    Beneath that arch of roses. Look, look, mother,
    They are taking leave of one another now,
    A ghastly parting, for he will be gone
    Well nigh four hours, they think. To look at them,
    One might suppose they knew it was for ever.

    ELINOR

    Come, or my hate will show itself in my face:
    I must not see them.

    [_Exeunt PRINCE and ELINOR. A pause. Enter ROBIN HOOD and
    MARIAN._]

    ROBIN

                          So, good-bye, once more,
    Sweetheart.

    MARIAN

                Four hours; how shall I pass the time?
    Four hours, four ages, you will scarce be home
    By dusk; how shall I pass it?

    ROBIN

                                  You've to think
    What robe to wear at the great masque to-night
    And then to don it. When you've done all that
    I shall be home again.

    MARIAN

                            What, not before?

    ROBIN

    That's not unlikely, either.

    MARIAN

                                Now you mock me,
    But you'll be back before the masque begins.

    ROBIN

    I warrant you I will.

    MARIAN

                          It is a month
    To-day since we were married. Did you know it?
    Fie, I believe you had forgotten, Robin.

    ROBIN

    I had, almost. If marriage make the moons
    Fly, as this month has flown, we shall be old
    And grey in our graves before we know it.
    I wish that we could chain old Father Time.

    MARIAN

    And break his glass into ten thousand pieces.

    ROBIN

    And drown his cruel scythe ten fathom deep,
    Under the bright blue sea whence Love was born:

    MARIAN

    Ah, but we have not parted all this month
    More than a garden's breadth, an arrow's flight:
    Time will be dead till you come back again.
    Four hours of absence make four centuries!
    Do you remember how the song goes, Robin,
    That bids true lovers not to grieve at parting
    Often? for Nature gently severs them thus,
    Training them up with kind and tender art,
    For the great day when they must part for ever.

    ROBIN

    Do you believe it, Marian?

    MARIAN

                              No; for love
    Buried beneath the dust of life and death,
    Would wait for centuries of centuries,
    Ages of ages, until God remembered,
    And, through that perishing cloud-wrack, face looked up
    Once more to loving face.

    ROBIN

                              Your hope--and mine!
    Is not a man's poor memory, indeed,
    A daily resurrection? Your hope--and mine!

    MARIAN

    And all the world's at heart! I do believe it.

    ROBIN

    And I--if only that so many souls
    Like yours have died believing they should meet
    Again, lovers and children, little children!
    God will not break that trust. I have found my heaven
    Again in you; and, though I stumble still,
    Your small hand leads me thro' the darkness, up
    And onward, to the heights I dared not see,
    And dare not even now; but my head bows
    Above your face; I see them in your eyes.
    Love, point me onward still!

    [_He takes her in his arms._]

                                Good-bye! Good-bye!

    MARIAN

    Come back, come back, before the masque begins!

    ROBIN

    Ay, or a little later--never fear:
    You'll not so easily lose me.

    MARIAN

                                  I shall count
    The minutes!

    ROBIN

                  Why, you're trembling!

    MARIAN

                                      Yes, I am foolish.
    This is the first small parting we have had;
    But--you'll be back ere dusk?

    ROBIN

    [_Laughing._]

                                 Ah, do you think
    That chains of steel could hold me, sweet, from you,
    With those two heavenly eyes to call me home,
    Those lips to welcome me? Good-bye!

    MARIAN

                                        Good-bye!

    [_He goes hurriedly out. She looks after him for a moment, then
    suddenly calls._]

    Robin! Ah, well, no matter now--too late!

    [_She stands looking after him._]


SCENE II. _Sherwood Forest: dusk. Outside the cave, as in the second
act. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF runs quickly across the glade, followed by PUCK._

    PUCK

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf! Shadow-of-a-Leaf! Shadow-of-a-Leaf!
    Don't dance away like that; don't hop; don't skip
    Like that, I tell you! I'll never do it again,
    I promise. Don't be silly now! Come here;
    I want to tell you something. Ah, that's right.
    Come, sit down here upon this bank of thyme
    "While I thine amiable ears"--Oh, no,
    Forgive me, ha! ha! ha!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Now, Master Puck,
    You'll kindly keep your word! A foxglove spray
    In the right hand is deadlier than the sword
    That mortals use, and one resounding thwack
    Applied to your slim fairyhood's green limbs
    Will make it painful, painful, very painful,
    Next time your worship wishes to sit down
    Cross-legged upon a mushroom.

    PUCK

                                  Ha! ha! ha!
    Poor Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                         You keep your word, that's all!

    PUCK

    Haven't I kept my word? Wasn't it I
    That made you what these poor, dull mortals call
    Crazy? Who crowned you with the cap and bells?
    Who made you such a hopeless, glorious fool
    That wise men are afraid of every word
    You utter? Wasn't it I that made you free
    Of fairyland--that showed you how to pluck
    Fern-seed by moonlight, and to walk and talk
    Between the lights, with urchins and with elves?
    Is there another fool twixt earth and heaven
    Like you--ungrateful rogue--answer me that!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    All true, dear gossip, and for saving me
    From the poor game of blind man's buff men call
    Wisdom, I thank you; but to hang and buzz
    Like a mad dragon-fly, now on my nose,
    Now on my neck, now singing in my ears,
    Is that to make me free of fairyland?
    No--that's enough to make the poor fool mad
    And take to human wisdom.

    PUCK

                               Yet you love me,
    Ha! ha!--you love me more than all the rest.
    You can't deny it! You can't deny it! Ha! ha!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    I won't deny it, gossip. E'en as I think
    There must be something loves us creatures, Puck,
    More than the Churchmen say. We are so teased
    With thorns, bullied with briars, baffled with stars.
    I've lain sometimes and laughed until I cried
    To see the round moon rising o'er these trees
    With that same foolish face of heavenly mirth
    Winking at lovers in the blue-bell glade.

    PUCK

    Lovers! Ha! ha! I caught a pair of 'em
    Last night, behind the ruined chapel! Lovers!
    O Lord, these mortals, they'll be the death of me!
    Hist, who comes here?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                            Scarlet and Little John,
    And all the merry men--not half so merry
    Since Robin went away. He was to come
    And judge between the rich and poor to-day,
    I think he has forgotten.

    PUCK

                              Hist, let me hide
    Behind this hawthorn bush till they are gone.

    [_Enter the FORESTERS--they all go into the cave except SCARLET
    and LITTLE JOHN, who stand at the entrance, looking
    anxiously back._]

    LITTLE JOHN

    I have never known the time when Robin Hood
    Said "I will surely come," and hath not been
    Punctual as yonder evening star.

    SCARLET

                                    Pray God
    No harm hath fallen him. Indeed he said,
    "Count on my coming."

    LITTLE JOHN

                        I'll sound yet one more call.
    They say these Courts will spoil a forester.
    It may be he has missed the way. I'd give
    My sword-hand just to hear his jolly bugle
    Answer me.

    [_He blows a forest call. They listen. All is silent._]

    SCARLET

              Silence--only the sough of leaves!

    LITTLE JOHN

    Well, I'm for sleep: the moon is not so bright
    Since Robin left us.

    SCARLET

                        Ha! Shadow-of-a-Leaf, alone?
    I thought I heard thy voice.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                Oh, he will talk
    With ferns and flowers and whisper to the mice!
    Perfectly happy, art thou not, dear fool?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Perfectly happy since I lost my wits!

    SCARLET

    Pray that thou never dost regain them, then,
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                    I thank you kindly, sir,
    And pray that you may quickly lose your own,
    And so be happy, too. Robin's away,
    But, if you'd lost your wits, you would not grieve.

    SCARLET

    Good-night, good fool.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                        I will not say "Good-night,"
    Wise man, for I am crazed, and so I know
    'Tis good, and yet you'll grieve. I wish you both
    A bad night that will tease your wits away
    And make you happy.

    [_The OUTLAWS enter the cave. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF beckons to
    PUCK, who steals out again._]

    PUCK

                        Shadow-of-a-Leaf, some change
    Is creeping o'er the forest. I myself
    Scarce laugh so much since Robin went away!
    Oh, my head hangs as heavily as a violet
    Brimmed with the rain. Shadow-of-a-Leaf, a cloud,
    A whisper steals across this listening wood!
    I am growing afraid. Dear fool, I am thy Puck,
    But I am growing afraid there comes an end
    To all our Sherwood revels, and I shall never
    Tease thee again.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                      Here comes the King!

    [_Enter OBERON._]

                                        Hail, Oberon.
    King of the fairies, I strew ferns before you.
    There are no palms here: ferns do just as well!

    OBERON

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, our battles all are wasted;
    Our fairy dreams whereby we strove to warn
    Robin and Marian, wasted. Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    Dear Robin Hood, the lover of the poor,
    And kind Maid Marian, our forest queen,
    Are in the toils at last!

    [_He pauses._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                              Speak, speak!

    OBERON

                                      Prince John
    Hath trapped and taken Robin.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Is not Richard
    King of this England? Did not Richard tempt
    Robin, for Marian's sake, to leave the forest?
    Did he not swear upon the Holy Cross
    That Robin should be Earl of Huntingdon
    And hold his lands in safety?

    OBERON

                                Only fear
    Of Richard held the wicked Prince in leash.
    But Richard roamed abroad again. Prince John
    Would murder Robin secretly.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Wise men
    Fight too much for these holy sepulchres!
    Are not the living images of God
    Better than empty graves?

    OBERON

                            One grave is filled
    Now; for our fairy couriers have brought
    Tidings that Richard Lion-Heart is dead.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                            Dead?

    OBERON

    Dead! In a few brief hours the news will reach
    The wicked Prince. He will be King of England,
    With Marian in his power!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                              No way to save them!

    OBERON

    We cannot break our fairy vows of silence.
    A mortal, Shadow-of-a-Leaf, can break those vows,
    But only on pain of death.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Oberon, I,
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf, the fool, must break my vows!
    I must save Robin Hood that he may save
    Marian from worse than death.

    OBERON

                                  Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    Think what death means to you, never to join
    Our happy sports again, never to see
    The moonlight streaming through these ancient oaks
    Again, never to pass the fairy gates
    Again. We cannot help it. They will close
    Like iron in your face, and you will hear
    Our happy songs within; but you will lie
    Alone, without, dying, and never a word
    To comfort you, no hand to touch your brow.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    So be it. I shall see them entering in!
    The time is brief. Quick, tell me, where is Robin?
    Quick, or the news that makes Prince John a king
    Will ruin all.

    OBERON

                    Robin is even now
    Thrust in the great dark tower beyond the wood,
    The topmost cell where foot can never climb.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Cannot an arrow reach it? Ay, be swift;
    Come, lead me thither.

    OBERON

                            I cannot disobey
    The word that kills the seed to raise the wheat,
    The word that--Shadow-of-a-Leaf, I think I know
    Now, why great kings ride out to the Crusade.


    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    Quickly, come, quickly!

    [_Exeunt OBERON and SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF. PUCK remains
    staring after them, then vanishes with a sob, between
    the trees. LITTLE JOHN and SCARLET appear once
    more at the mouth of the cave._]

    SCARLET

                          I thought I heard a voice.


    LITTLE JOHN

    'Twas only Shadow-of-a-Leaf again. He talks
    For hours among the ferns, plays with the flowers,
    And whispers to the mice, perfectly happy!


    SCARLET

    I cannot rest for thinking that some harm
    Hath chanced to Robin. Call him yet once more.

    [_LITTLE JOHN blows his bugle. All is silent. They stand
    listening._]


SCENE III. _A gloomy cell. ROBIN bound. PRINCE JOHN and two mercenaries.
A low narrow door in the background, small barred window on the left._

    PRINCE JOHN

    [_To the Mercenaries._]

    Leave us a moment. I have private matters
    To lay before this friend of all the poor.
    You may begin to build the door up now,
    So that you do not wall me in with him.

    [_The two men begin filling up the doorway with rude blocks of
    masonry._]

    So now, my good green foot-pad, you are trapped
    At last, trapped in the practice of your trade!
    Trapped, as you took your stolen Norman gold
    To what was it--a widow, or Saxon serf
    With eye put out for breaking forest laws?
    You hold with them, it seems. Your dainty soul
    Sickens at our gross penalties; and so
    We'll not inflict them on your noble self,
    Although we have the power. There's not a soul
    Can ever tell where Robin Hood is gone.
    These walls will never echo it.

    [_He taps the wall with his sword._]

                                      And yet
    There surely must be finer ways to torture
    So fine a soul as yours. Was it not you
    Who gave me like a fairing to my brother
    With lofty condescension in your eyes;
    And shall I call my mercenaries in
    And bid them burn your eyes out with hot irons?
    Richard is gone--he'll never hear of it!
    An Earl that plays the robber disappears,
    That's all. Most like he died in some low scuffle
    Out in the greenwood. I am half inclined
    To call for red-hot irons after all,
    So that your sympathy with Saxon churls
    May be more deep, you understand; and then
    It would be sweet for you, alone and blind,
    To know that you could never in this life
    See Marian's face again. But no--that's bad.
    Bad art to put hope's eyes out. It destroys
    Half a man's fear to rob him of his hope.
    No; you shall drink the dregs of it. Hope shall die
    More exquisite a death. Robin, my friend,
    You understand that, when I quit your presence,
    This bare blank cell becomes your living tomb.
    Do you not comprehend? It's none so hard.
    The doorway will be built up. There will be
    No door, you understand, but just a wall,
    Some six feet thick, of solid masonry.
    Nobody will disturb you, even to bring
    Water or food. You'll starve--see--like a rat,
    Bricked up and buried. But you'll have time to think
    Of how I tread a measure at the masque
    To-night, with Marian, while her wide eyes wonder
    Where Robin is--and old Fitzwalter smiles
    And bids his girl be gracious to the Prince
    For his land's sake. Ah, ha! you wince at that!
    Will you not speak a word before I go?
    Speak, damn you!

    [_He strikes ROBIN across the face with his glove. ROBIN remains
    silent._]

              Six days hence, if you keep watch
    At yonder window (you'll be hungry then)
    You may catch sight of Marian and Prince John
    Wandering into the gardens down below.
    You will be hungry then; perhaps you'll strive
    To call to us, or stretch a meagre arm
    Through those strong bars; but then you know the height
    Is very great--no voice can reach to the earth:
    This is the topmost cell in my Dark Tower.
    Men look like ants below there. I shall say
    To Marian, See that creature waving there
    High up above us, level with the clouds,
    Is it not like a winter-shrivelled fly?
    And she will laugh; and I will pluck her roses.
    And then--and then--there are a hundred ways,
    You know, to touch a woman's blood with thoughts
    Beyond its lawful limits. Ha! ha! ha!
    By God, you almost spoke to me, I think.
    Touches at twilight, whispers in the dark,
    Sweet sympathetic murmurs o'er the loss
    Of her so thoughtless Robin, do you think
    Maid Marian will be quite so hard to win
    When princes come to woo? There will be none
    To interrupt us then. Time will be mine
    To practise all the amorous arts of Ovid,
    And, at the last--

    ROBIN
                      Will you not free my hands?
    You have your sword. But I would like to fight you
    Here, with my naked hands. I want no more.

    PRINCE JOHN

    Ha! ha! At last the sullen speaks.
                                    That's all
    I wanted. I have struck you in the face.
    Is't not enough? You can't repay that blow.

    ROBIN

    Bury, me down in hell and I'll repay it
    The day you die, across your lying mouth
    That spoke of my true lady, I will repay it,
    Before the face of God!

    PRINCE JOHN

    [_Laughing._]

                              Meanwhile, for me
    Till you repay that blow, there is the mouth
    Of Marian, the sweet honey-making mouth
    That shall forestall your phantom blow with balm.
    Oh, you'll go mad too soon if I delay.
    I am glad you spoke. Farewell, the masons wait.
    And I must not be late for Marian.

    [_Exit thro' the small aperture now left in the doorway. It
    is rapidly closed and sounds of heavy masonry being
    piled against it are heard. ROBIN tries to free his
    hands and after an effort, succeeds. He hurls himself
    against the doorway, and finds it hopeless. He
    turns to the window, peers through it for a moment, then
    suddenly unwinds a scarf from his neck, ties it to one
    of the bars and stands to one side._]

    ROBIN
    Too high a shot for most of my good bowmen!
    What's that? A miss?

    [_He looks thro' the window._]

                        Good lad, he'll try again!

    [_He stands at the side once more and an arrow comes thro' the
    window._]

    Why, that's like magic!

    [_He pulls up the thread attached to it._]

                            Softly, or 'twill break!--
    Ah, now 'tis sturdy cord.
                              --I'll make it fast.
    But, how to break these bars!
                                St. Nicholas,
    There's someone climbing. He must have a head
    Of iron, and the lightness of a cat!
    Downward is bad enough, but up is more
    Than mortal! Who the devil can it be?
    Thank God, it's growing dark. But what a risk!
    None of my merry men could e'en attempt it.
    I'm very sure it can't be Little John.
    What, Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    [_SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF appears at the window._]

                          'Fore God, dear faithful fool,
    I am glad to see you.

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                          Softly, gossip, softly,
    Pull up the rope a little until we break
    This bar away--or some kind friend may see
    The dangling end below. Now here's a toothpick,
    Six inches of grey steel, for you to work with,
    And here's another for me. Pick out the mortar!

    [_They work to loosen the bars._]

    Wait! Here's a rose I brought you in my cap
    And here's a spray of fern! Old Nature's keys
    Open all prisons, I'll throw them in for luck,

    [_He throws them into the cell and begins working feverishly again._]

    So that the princes of the world may know
    The forest let you out. Down there on earth,
    If any sees me, they will only think
    The creepers are in leaf. Pick out the mortar!
    That's how the greenwood works. You know, 'twill thrust
    Its tendrils through these big grey stones one day
    And pull them down. I noticed in the courtyard
    The grass is creeping though the crevices
    Already, and yellow dandelions crouch
    In all the crumbling corners. Pick it out!
    This is a very righteous work indeed
    For men in Lincoln green; for what are we
    But tendrils of old Nature, herald sprays!
    We scarce anticipate. Pick the mortar out.
    Quick, there's no time to lose, although to-night
    We're in advance of sun and moon and stars
    And all the tackling sands in Time's turned glass.

    [_With a sudden cry._]

    Richard is dead!

    ROBIN
                    Richard is dead! The King
    Is dead!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                Ah, dead! Come, pick the mortar out,
    Out of the walls of towers and shrines and tombs!
    For now Prince John is King, and Lady Marian
    In peril, gossip! Yet we are in advance
    Of sun and moon to-night, for sweet Prince John
    Is not aware yet of his kinglihood,
    Or of his brother's death.

    ROBIN

    [_Pausing a moment._]

                           Why, Shadow-of-a-Leaf,
    What does this mean?

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                          Come, pick the mortar out;
    You have no time to lose. This very night
    My Lady Marian must away to Sherwood.
    At any moment the dread word may come
    That makes John King of England. Quick, be quick!

    ROBIN

    She is at the masque to-night!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

                                Then you must mask
    And fetch her thence! Ah, ha, the bar works loose.
    Pull it!

    [_They pull at the bar, get it free, and throw it into the cell._]

              Now, master, follow me down the rope.

    [_Exit ROBIN thro' the window._]


SCENE IV. _Night. The garden of the King's palace (as before), but
lighted with torches for the masque. Music swells up and dies away
continually. Maskers pass to and fro between the palace and the garden.
On the broad terrace in front some of them are dancing a galliard._

[_PRINCE JOHN enters and is met by_ QUEEN ELINOR, _neither of them
masked._]

    ELINOR

    All safe?

    PRINCE JOHN

                Ay, buried and bricked up now, to think
    Alone, in the black night, of all I told him.
    Thank God, we have heard the last of Robin Hood.

    ELINOR

    [_She puts on her mask._]

    You are sure?

    PRINCE JOHN

                      I saw him entombed with my own eyes!
    Six feet of solid masonry. Look there,
    There's the young knight you've lately made your own.
    Where is my Lady Marian? Ah, I see her!
    With that old hypocrite, Fitzwalter.

    [_They part. PRINCE JOHN puts on his mask as he goes._]

    A LADY

                                    But tell me
    Where is Prince John?

    A MASKER

                            That burly-shouldered man
    By yonder pillar, talking with old Fitzwalter,
    And the masked girl, in green, with red-gold hair,
    Is Lady Marian!

    THE LADY

                        Where is Robin Hood?
    I have never seen him, but from all one hears
    He is a wood-god and a young Apollo,
    And a more chaste Actæon all in one.

    MASKER

    Oh, ay, he never watched Diana bathing,
    Or, if he did, all Sherwood winked at it.
    Who knows? Do you believe a man and maid
    Can sleep out in the woods all night, as these
    Have slept a hundred times, and put to shame
    Our first poor parents; throw the apple aside
    And float out of their leafy Paradise
    Like angels?

    LADY

                  No; I fear the forest boughs
    Could tell sad tales. Oh, I imagine it--
    Married to Robin, by a fat hedge-priest
    Under an altar of hawthorn, with a choir
    Of sparrows, and a spray of cuckoo-spit
    For holy water! Oh, the modest chime
    Of blue-bells from a fairy belfry, a veil
    Of evening mist, a robe of golden hair;
    A blade of grass for a ring; a band of thieves
    In Lincoln green to witness the sweet bans;
    A glow-worm for a nuptial taper, a bed
    Of rose-leaves, and wild thyme and wood-doves' down.
    Quick! Draw the bridal curtains--three tall ferns--
    Across the cave mouth, lest a star should peep
    And make the wild rose leap into her face!
    Pish! A sweet maid! But where is Robin Hood?

    MASKER

    I know not; but he'd better have a care
    Of Mistress Marian. If I know Prince John
    He has marked her for his own.

    LADY

                                  I cannot see
    What fascinates him.

    MASKER

                          No, you are right, nor I.

    PRINCE JOHN

    Come, Lady Marian, let me lead you out
    To tread a measure.

    MARIAN

                        Pray, sir, pardon me!
    I am tired.

    FITZWALTER

    [_Whispering angrily to her._]

                  Now, Marian, be not so ungracious.
    You both abuse him and disparage us.
    His courtiers led the ladies they did choose.
    Do not displease him, girl. I pray you, go!
    Dance out your galliard. God's dear holy-bread,
    Y'are too forgetful. Dance, or by my troth,
    You'll move my patience. I say you do us wrong.

    MARIAN

    I will do what you will. Lead, lead your dance.

    [_Exeunt JOHN and MARIAN._]

    FIRST MASKER

    [_To a lady, as they come up from the garden._]

    Will you not let me see your face now, sweet?

    LADY

    You hurt my lip with that last kiss of yours.
    Hush, do not lean your face so close, I pray you;
    Loosen my fingers. There's my lord.

    FIRST MASKER

                                        Where? Where?
    Now, if I know him, I shall know your name!

    LADY

    That tall man with the damozel in red.

    FIRST MASKER

    Oh, never fear him. He, too, wore a mask!
    I saw them--

    [_They pass out talking._]

    SECOND MASKER

    [_Looking after them._]

                        Saw you those two turtle-doves!

    SECOND LADY

    Yes.

    SECOND MASKER

    Come with me, I'll show you where I caught them
    Among the roses, half an hour ago.

    [_They laugh and exeunt into the gardens. The music swells up
    and more dancers appear._]

    [_Enter ROBIN HOOD, still in his forester's garb, but wearing a
    mask. He walks as if wounded and in pain. He
    sits down in the shadow of a pillar watching, and
    partly concealed from the throng._]

    THIRD LADY

    Remember now to say you did not see me
    Here at the masque.

    THIRD MASKER

                          Or shall I say that I
    Was out in Palestine?

    [_They pass. Enter little ARTHUR PLANTAGENET. He comes
    up to ROBIN HOOD._]

    ARTHUR

                            Are you not Robin Hood?

    ROBIN

    Hush, Arthur. Don't you see I wear a mask
    Like all the rest to-night?

    ARTHUR

                                Why do they wear
    Masks?

    ROBIN

            They must always wear some sort of mask
    At court. Sometimes they wear them all their lives.

    ARTHUR

    You are jesting, Robin. Now I wanted you
    To tell me tales of Sherwood. Tell me how
    You saved Will Scarlet.

    ROBIN

                            Why, I've told you that
    A score of times.

    ARTHUR

                  I know, I want to hear it
    Again. Well, tell me of that afternoon
    When Lion-Heart came home from the Crusade.
    I have often thought of that. It must have been
    Splendid! You weren't expecting it at all?

    ROBIN

    No, not at all; but, Arthur, tell me first
    Have you seen Lady Marian?

    ARTHUR

                              Yes, I saw her
    Treading a measure with my Uncle John!

    ROBIN

    Stand where you are and watch; and, if you see her,
    Beckon her. Then I'll tell you how the King
    Came home from the Crusade.

    ARTHUR

                                First, let me tell you
    Just how I think it was. It must have been
    Like a great picture. All your outlaws there
    Sitting around your throne of turf, and you
    Judging the rich and poor. That's how it was
    Last night, I dreamed of it; and you were taking
    The baron's gold and giving it to the halt
    And blind; and then there was a great big light
    Between the trees, as if a star had come
    Down to the earth and caught among the boughs,
    With beams like big soft swords amongst the ferns
    And leaves, and through the light a mighty steed
    Stepped, and the King came home from the Crusade.
    Was it like that? Was there a shining light?

    ROBIN

    I think there must have been, a blinding light,

    ARTHUR

    Filling an arch of leaves?

    ROBIN

                                  Yes!

    ARTHUR

                                  That was it!
    That's how the King came home from the Crusade.

    ROBIN

    But there--you've told the story!

    ARTHUR

                                    Ah, not all!

    ROBIN

    No, not quite all. What's that?

    [_The music suddenly stops. The maskers crowd together whispering
    excitedly._]

    ARTHUR

                                Why have they stopped
    The music? Ah, there's Hubert. Shall I ask him?

    ROBIN

    Yes, quickly, and come back!

    [_ARTHUR runs up to a masker. Several go by hurriedly._]

    FIRST MASKER

                                  The King is dead!

    SECOND MASKER

    Where did it happen? France?

    FIRST MASKER

                                I know not, sir!

    [_ARTHUR returns._]

    ARTHUR

    Robin, they say the King is dead! So John
    Is king now, is he not?

    ROBIN

                              Ay, John is king!
    Now, tell me quickly, use your eyes, my boy,
    Where's Lady Marian?

    ARTHUR

                          Ah, there she is at last,
    Alone!

    ROBIN

    Go to her quickly, and bring her hither.

    [_ARTHUR runs off and returns with_ MARIAN.]

    MARIAN

    Robin, thank God, you have returned. I feared--

    ROBIN

    No more, dear heart, you must away to Sherwood!
    Shadow-of-a-Leaf is waiting by the orchard
    With your white palfrey. Away, or the new king
    Will hunt us down. I'll try to gain you time.
    Go--quickly!

    MARIAN

    Robin, your face is white, you are wounded!
    What's this--there's blood upon your doublet!
    Robin!

    ROBIN

          Nothing! Go, quickly!

    MARIAN

                              Robin, I cannot leave you.

    ROBIN

    Go, Marian. If you ever loved me, go.

    MARIAN

    You'll follow?

    ROBIN

                  Oh, with my last breath I will,
    God helping me; but I must gain you time!
    Quickly! Here comes the King!

    MARIAN

                                  Oh, follow soon!

    [_Exit._]

    [_ROBIN sits down again, steadying himself against the pillar.
    JOHN appears at the doors of the palace, above the terrace, a
    scroll in his hand._]

    JOHN

    My friends, the King is dead!

    MASKERS


    [_Taking off their masks, with a cry._]

                          Long live King John!

    JOHN


    [_Coming down amongst them._]

    Our masque is ended by this grievous news;
    But where's my Lady Marian? I had some word
    To speak with her! Not here! Why--

    ROBIN


    [_Still masked, rises and confronts the King, who stares at him and
    shrinks back a little._]

                                      All the masks
    Are off, sire! No, perhaps they wear them still.

    JOHN

    Who is this?

    ROBIN

    One that was dead and lives. You say
    Your brother, the great King, is dead. Oh, sire,
    If that be so, you'll hear a dead man speak,
    For your dead brother's sake. You say the King
    Is dead; but you are king. So the King lives!
    You are King of England now from sea to sea,
    Is it not so? Shout, maskers, once again,
    Long live the King!

    MASKERS

                          Long live the King!

    ROBIN

                                            You see
    What power is yours! Your smile is life, your frown
    Death. At a word from you the solid earth
    Would shake with tramp of armies. You can call
    Thousands to throw away their lives like straws
    Upon your side, if any foreign king
    Dare to affront you.

    [_He draws nearer to JOHN, who still shrinks a little, as if in fear._]

                        Richard, you say, is dead,
    And yet, O King, I say that the great King
    Lives!

    [_He strikes JOHN across the face. JOHN cowers and staggers back.
    The MASKERS draw their swords, the women
    scream and rush together. ROBIN turns, sword in hand,
    to confront the MASKERS._]

              Back, fools; for I say that the great King
    Lives. Do not doubt it. Ye have dreamed him dead
    How often. Hark, God in heaven, ye know that voice.

    [_A voice is heard drawing nearer thro' the distant darkness of the
    garden, singing. All listen. JOHN'S face whitens._]

    [_Song._]

    Knight, on the narrow way,
      Where wouldst thou ride?
    "Onward," I heard him say,
      "Love, to thy side."

    ROBIN

    'Tis Blondel! Still vaunt-courier to the King,
    As when he burst the bonds of Austria! Listen!

    [_Song nearer._]

    "Nay," sang a bird above,
      "Stay, for I see
    Death, in the mask of love,
      Waiting for thee."

    MASKERS

    [_Resuming their masks and muttering to one another._]

    Can the King live? Is this John's treachery? Look,
    He is crushed with fear!

    ROBIN
                           Listen! I'll go to meet him.

    [_Exit into the garden._]

    MASKERS

    It was the song of Blondel! The same song
    He made with Richard, long since!--
                                        Blondel's voice!
    Just as we heard it on that summer's night
    When Lion-Heart came home from the Crusade.

    [_The Song still drawing nearer._]

    "Death! What is Death?" he cried.
      "I must ride on,
    On to my true love's side,
      Up to her throne!"

    [_Enter BLONDEL, from the garden. He stands, startled by the
    scene before him._]

    MASKERS

    Blondel! Where is the King? Where is the King?

    BLONDEL

    Did ye not know?--Richard, the King, is dead!

    MASKERS

    Dead!

    JOHN

            Dead! And ye let the living dog escape
    That dared snarl at our sovereignty. I know him,
    Risen from the dead or not. I know 'twas he,
    'Twas Robin Hood! After him; hunt him down!
    Let him not live to greet another sun.
    After him!

    MASKERS

    [_Drawing their swords and plunging into the darkness._]

              After him; hunt the villain down!

    [_Curtain._]




ACT V


SCENE I. _Morning. Sherwood Forest (as before). LITTLE JOHN and some of
the OUTLAWS are gathered together talking. Occasionally they look
anxiously toward the cave and at the approaches through the wood. Enter
two FORESTERS, running and breathless._

    FIRST FORESTER

    The King's men! They are scouring thro' the wood,
    Two troops of them, five hundred men in each
    And more are following.

    SECOND FORESTER

                            We must away from here
    And quickly.

    LITTLE JOHN

                          Where did you sight them?

    SECOND FORESTER

                             From the old elm,
    Our watch-tower. They were not five miles away!

    FIRST FORESTER

    Five, about five. We saw the sunlight flash
    Along, at least five hundred men at arms;
    And, to the north, along another line,
    Bigger, I think; but not so near.

    SECOND FORESTER

                                   Where's Robin?
    We must away at once!

    FIRST FORESTER

                           No time to lose!

    LITTLE JOHN

    His wound is bitter--I know not if we dare
    Move him!

    FIRST FORESTER

              His wound?

    LITTLE JOHN

                          Ay, some damned arrow pierced him
    When he escaped last night from the Dark Tower.
    He never spoke of it when first he reached us;
    And, suddenly, he swooned. He is asleep
    Now. He must not be wakened. They will take
    Some time yet ere they thread our forest-maze.

    FIRST FORESTER

    Not long, by God, not long. They are moving fast.

    [_MARIAN appears at the mouth of the cave. All turn to look at
    her, expectantly. She seems in distress._]

    MARIAN

    He is tossing to and fro. I think his wound
    Has taken fever! What can we do?

    FRIAR TUCK

                                  I've sent
    A messenger to Kirklee Priory,
    Where my old friend the Prioress hath store
    Of balms and simples, and hath often helped
    A wounded forester. Could we take him there,
    Her skill would quickly heal him.

    LITTLE JOHN

                                      The time is pressing!

    FRIAR TUCK

    The lad will not be long!

    [_ROBIN appears tottering and white at the mouth of the cave._]

    MARIAN

    [_Running to him._]

                                   O Robin, Robin,
    You must not rise! Your wound!

    ROBIN

    [_He speaks feverishly._]

                                        Where can I rest
    Better than on my greenwood throne of turf?
    Friar, I heard them say they had some prisoners.
    Bring them before me.

    FRIAR TUCK

                          Master, you are fevered,
    And they can wait.

    ROBIN

                             Yes, yes; but there are some
    That cannot wait, that die for want of food,
    And then--the Norman gold will come too late,
    Too late.

    LITTLE JOHN
                O master, you must rest.

    [_Going up to him._]

    MARIAN
                                        Oh, help me,
    Help me with him. Help me to lead him back.

    ROBIN

    No! No! You must not touch me! I will rest
    When I have seen the prisoners, not before.

    LITTLE JOHN

    He means it, mistress, better humour him
    Or he will break his wound afresh.

    MARIAN

                                         O Robin,
    Give me your word that you'll go back and rest,
    When you have seen them.

    ROBIN

                                Yes, I will try, I will try!
    But oh, the sunlight! Where better, sweet, than this?

    [_She leads him to the throne of turf and he sits down upon it, with
    MARIAN at his side._]

    The Friar is right. This life is wine, red wine,
    Under the greenwood boughs! Oh, still to keep it,
    One little glen of justice in the midst
    Of multitudinous wrong. Who knows? We yet
    May leaven the whole world.

    [_Enter the Outlaws, with several prisoners, among them, a
    KNIGHT, an ABBOT, and a FORESTER._]

                                  Those are the prisoners?
    You had some victims of the forest laws
    That came to you for help. Bring them in, too,
    And set them over against these lords of the earth!

    [_Some ragged women and children appear. Several serfs with
    iron collars round their necks and their eyes put out,
    are led gently in._]

    Is that our Lincoln green among the prisoners?
    There? One of my own band?

    LITTLE JOHN

                                Ay, more's the pity!
    We took him out of pity, and he has wronged
    Our honour, sir; he has wronged a helpless woman
    Entrusted to his guidance thro' the forest.

    ROBIN

    Ever the same, the danger comes from those
    We fight for, those below, not those above!
    Which of you will betray me to the King?

    THE FORESTER

    Do you ask _me_, sir?

    ROBIN

                              Judas answered first,
    With "Master, is it I?" Hang not thy head!
    What say'st thou to this charge?

    THE FORESTER

                                Why, Friar Tuck
    Can answer for me. Do you think he cares
    Less for a woman's lips than I?

    FRIAR TUCK

                                    Cares less,
    Thou rotten radish? Nay, but a vast deal more!
    God's three best gifts to man,--woman and song
    And wine, what dost _thou_ know of all their joy?
    Thou lean pick-purse of kisses?

    ROBIN

                                    Take him out,
    Friar, and let him pack his goods and go,
    Whither he will. I trust the knave to thee
    And thy good quarter-staff, for some five minutes
    Before he says "Farewell."

    FRIAR

                                    Bring him along,
    Give him a quarter-staff, I'll thrash him roundly.

    [_He goes out. Two of the FORESTERS follow with the prisoner.
    Others bring the ABBOT before ROBIN._]

    ROBIN

    Ah! Ha! I know him, the godly usurer
    Of York!

    LITTLE JOHN

               We saw a woman beg for alms,
    One of the sufferers by the rule which gave
    This portly Norman his fat priory
    And his abundant lands. We heard him say
    That he was helpless, had not one poor coin
    To give her, not a scrap of bread! He wears
    Purple beneath his cloak: his fine sleek palfrey
    Flaunted an Emperor's trappings!

    ABBOT

                                      Man, the Church
    Must keep her dignity!

    ROBIN

    [_Pointing to the poor woman, etc._]

                            Ay, look at it!
    There is your dignity! And you must wear
    Silk next your skin to show it. But there was one
    You call your Master, and He had not where
    To lay His head, save one of these same trees!

    ABBOT

    Do you blaspheme! I pray you, let me go!
    There are grave matters waiting. I am poor!

    ROBIN

    Look in his purse and see.

    ABBOT

    [_Hurriedly._]

                                    I have five marks
    In all the world, no more. I'll give them to you!

    ROBIN

    Look in his purse and see.

    [_They pour a heap of gold out of his purse._]

    ROBIN

                                Five marks, Indeed!
    Here's, at the least, a hundred marks in gold!

    ABBOT

    That is my fees, my fees; you must not take them!

    ROBIN

    The ancient miracle!--five loaves, two small fishes;
    And then--of what remained--they gathered up
    Twelve basketsful!

    ABBOT

                          Oh, you blaspheming villains!

    ROBIN

    Abbot, I chance to know how this was wrought,
    This miracle; wrought with the blood, anguish and sweat
    Of toiling peasants, while the cobwebs clustered
    Around your lordly cellars of red wine.
    Give him his five and let him go.

    ABBOT

    [_Going out._]

                                        The King
    Shall hear of this! The King will hunt you down!

    ROBIN

    And now--the next!

    SCARLET

                        Beseech you, sir, to rest,
    Your wound will--

    ROBIN

                    No! The next, show me the next!

    SCARLET

    This Norman baron--

    ROBIN

                        What, another friend!
    Another master of broad territories.
    How many homes were burned to make you lord
    Of half a shire? What hath he in his purse?

    SCARLET

    Gold and to spare!

    BARON

                      To keep up mine estate
    I need much more.

    ROBIN

    [_Pointing to the poor._]

                      Ay, you need these! these! these!

    BARON

    [_Protesting._]

    I am not rich.

    ROBIN

                  Look in his purse and see.

    BARON

    You dogs, the King shall hear of it!

    ROBIN

    [_Murmuring as if to himself._]

                                      Five loaves!
    And yet, of what remained, they gathered up
    Twelve basketsful. The bread of human kindness
    Goes far! Oh, I begin to see new meanings
    In that old miracle! How much? How much?

    SCARLET

    Five hundred marks in gold!

    ROBIN

    [_Half rising and speaking with a sudden passion._]

                              His churls are starving,
    Starving! Their little children cry for bread!
    One of those jewels on his baldric there
    Would feed them all in plenty all their lives!
    Five loaves--and yet--and yet--of what remained,
    The fragments, mark you, twelve great basketsful!

    BARON

    I am in a madman's power! The man is mad!

    ROBIN

    Take all he has, all you can get. To-night,
    When all is dark (we must have darkness, mind,
    For deeds like this) blind creatures will creep out
    With groping hands and gaping mouths, lean arms,
    And shrivelled bodies, branded, fettered, lame,
    Distorted, horrible; and they will weep
    Great tears like gouts of blood upon our feet,
    And we shall succour them and make them think
    (That's if you have not mangled their poor souls
    As well, or burned their children with their homes),
    We'll try to make them think that some few roods
    Of earth are not so bitter as hell might be.
    Are you not glad to think of this? Nay--go--
    Or else your face will haunt me when I die!
    Take him quickly away. The next! The next!
    O God!

    [_Flings up his arms and falls fainting._]

    MARIAN

    [_Bending over him._]

            O Robin! Robin! Help him quickly.
    The wound! The wound!

    [_They gather round ROBIN. The OUTLAWS come back with the
    captive FORESTER, his pack upon his back._]

    FRIAR TUCK

    [_To the FORESTER._]

                        Now, get you gone and quickly!
    What, what hath happened?

    [_FRIAR TUCK and the OUTLAWS join the throng round ROBIN. The
    FORESTER shakes his fist at them and goes across the glade
    muttering. The MESSENGER from Kirklee Priory comes out of the
    forest at the same moment and speaks to him, not knowing of his
    dismissal._]

    MESSENGER

                            All's well! Robin can come
    To Kirklee. Our old friend the Prioress
    Is there, and faithful! They've all balms and simples
    To heal a wound.

    FORESTER

    [_Staring at him._]

                      To Kirklee?

    MESSENGER

                                Yes, at sunset,
    We'll take him to the borders of the wood
    All will be safe.
    Where he can steal in easily, alone.

    FORESTER

                                        The King's men are at hand!

    MESSENGER

    Oh, but if we can leave him there, all's safe;
    We'll dodge the King's men.

    FORESTER

                                When is he to go?

    MESSENGER

    Almost at once; but he must not steal in
    Till sundown, when the nuns are all in chapel.
    How now? What's this? What's this?

    [_He goes across to the throng round ROBIN._]

    FORESTER

    [_Looking after him._]

    Alone, to Kirklee!

    [_Exit._]


SCENE II. _A room in Kirklee Priory. A window on the right overlooks a
cloister leading up to the chapel door. The forest is seen in the
distance, the sun beginning to set behind it. The PRIORESS and a NOVICE
are sitting in a window-seat engaged in broidery work._

    NOVICE

    He must be a good man--this Robin Hood!
    I long to see him. Father used to say
    England had known none like him since the days
    Of Hereward the Wake.

    PRIORESS

                              He will be here
    By vespers. You shall let him in. Who's that?
    Can that be he? It is not sundown yet.
    See who is there.

    [_Exit NOVICE. She returns excitedly._]

    NOVICE

                        A lady asks to see you!
    She is robed like any nun and yet she spoke
    Like a great lady--one that is used to rule
    More than obey; and on her breast I saw
    A ruby smouldering like a secret fire
    Beneath her cloak. She bade me say she came
    On Robin Hood's behest.

    PRIORESS

                            What? Bring her in
    Quickly.

    [_Exit NOVICE and returns with QUEEN ELINOR in a nun's garb. At
    the sign from the PRIORESS the NOVICE retires._]

    ELINOR

              Madam, I come to beg a favour.
    I am a friend of Robin Hood. I have heard--
    One of his Foresters, this very noon
    Brought me the news--that he is sorely wounded;
    And purposes to seek your kindly help
    At Kirklee Priory.

    PRIORESS

                            Oh, then indeed,
    You must be a great friend, for this was kept
    Most secret from all others.

    ELINOR

                                A great friend!
    He was my page some fifteen years ago,
    And all his life I have watched over him
    As if he were my son! I have come to beg
    A favour--let me see him when he comes.
    My husband was a soldier, and I am skilled
    In wounds. In Palestine I saved his life
    When every leech despaired of it, a wound
    Caused by a poisoned arrow.

    PRIORESS

                              You shall see him.
    I have some skill myself in balms and simples,
    But, in these deadlier matters I would fain
    Trust to your wider knowledge.

    ELINOR

                                  Let me see him alone;
    Alone, you understand. His mind is fevered.
    I have an influence over him. Do not say
    That I am here, or aught that will excite him.
    Better say nothing--lead him gently in,
    And leave him. In my hands he is like a child.

    PRIORESS

    It shall be done. I see you are subtly versed
    In the poor workings of our mortal minds.

    ELINOR

    I learnt much from a wise old Eastern leech
    When I was out in Palestine.

    PRIORESS

                                I have heard
    They have great powers and magic remedies;
    They can restore youth to the withered frame.

    ELINOR

    There is only one thing that they cannot do.

    PRIORESS

    And what?

    ELINOR

              They cannot raise the dead.

    PRIORESS

                                        Ah, no;
    I am most glad to hear you say it, most glad
    To know we think alike. That is most true--
    Yes--yes--most true; for God alone, dear friend,
    Can raise the dead!

    [_A bell begins tolling slowly._]

                        The bell for even-song!
    You have not long to wait.

    [_Shadowy figures of nuns pass the windows and enter the chapel.
    The sunset deepens._]

                              Will you not pray
    With me?

    [_The PRIORESS and QUEEN ELINOR kneel down together before a
    little shrine. Enter the NOVICE._]

    NOVICE

                    There is a forester at the door.
    Mother, I think 'tis he!

    PRIORESS

    [_Rising._]

                            Admit him, then.

    ELINOR

    Leave me: I will keep praying till he comes.

    PRIORESS

    You are trembling! You are not afraid?

    ELINOR

    [_With eyes closed as in strenuous devotion._]

                                    No; no;
    Leave me, I am but praying!

    [_A chant swells up in the chapel. Exit PRIORESS. ELINOR continues
    muttering as in prayer. Enter ROBIN HOOD,
    steadying himself on his bow, weak and white. She
    rises and passes between him and the door to confront
    him._]

    ELINOR

    Ah, Robin, you have come to me at last
    For healing. Pretty Marian cannot help you
    With all her kisses.

    ROBIN HOOD

    [_Staring at her wildly._]

                        You! I did not know
    That you were here. I did not ask your help.
    I must go--Marian!

    [_He tries to reach the door, but reels in a half faint on the way.
    ELINOR supports him as he pauses, panting for breath._]

    ELINOR

                        Robin, your heart is hard,
    Both to yourself and me. You cannot go,
    Rejecting the small help which I can give
    As if I were a leper. Ah, come back.
    Are you so unforgiving? God forgives!
    Did you not see me praying for your sake?
    Think, if you think not of yourself, oh, think
    Of Marian--can you leave her clinging arms
    Yet, for the cold grave, Robin? I have risked
    Much, life itself, to bring you help this day!
    I have some skill in wounds.

    [_She holds him closer and brings her face near to his own, looking
    into his eyes._]

                                Ah, do you know
    How slowly, how insidiously this death
    Creeps, coil by tightening coil, around a man,
    When he is weak as you are? Do you know
    How the last subtle coil slips round your throat
    And the flat snake-like head lifts up and peers
    With cruel eyes of cold, keen inquisition,
    Rivetting your own, until the blunt mouth sucks
    Your breath out with one long, slow, poisonous kiss?

    ROBIN HOOD

    O God, that nightmare! Leave me! Let me go!

    ELINOR

    You stare at me as if you saw that snake.
    Ha! Ha! Your nerves are shaken; you are so weak!
    You cannot go! What! Fainting? Ah, rest here
    Upon this couch.

    [_She half supports, half thrusts him back to a couch, in an alcove
    out of sight and draws a curtain. There is a knock at
    the door._]

    ELINOR

                    Who's there?

    PRIORESS

                                Madam, I came
    To know if I could help in anything.

    ELINOR

    Nothing! His blood runs languidly. It needs
    The pricking of a vein to make the heart
    Beat, and the sluggish rivers flow. I have brought
    A lance for it. I'll let a little blood.
    Not over-much; enough, enough to set
    The pulses throbbing.

    PRIORESS

                        Maid Marian came with him.
    She waits without and asks--

    ELINOR

                              Let her not come
    Near him till all is done. Let her not know
    Anything, or the old fever will awake.
    I'll lance his arm now!

    [_The PRIORESS closes the door. ELINOR goes into the alcove. The
    chant from the chapel swells up again. QUEEN
    ELINOR comes out of the alcove, white and trembling.
    She speaks in a low whisper as she looks back._]

    Now, trickle down, sweet blood. Grow white, fond lips
    That have kissed Marian--yet, she shall not boast
    You kissed her last; for I will have you wake
    To the fierce memory of this kiss in heaven
    Or burn with it in hell;

    [_She kneels down as if to kiss the face of ROBIN, within. The
    chant from the chapel swells up more loudly. The door
    slowly opens. MARIAN steals in. ELINOR rises and confronts
    her._]

    ELINOR

    [_Laying a hand upon ROBIN'S bow beside her._]

    Hush! Do not wake him!

    MARIAN

    [_In a low voice._]

                          What have you done with him?

    ELINOR

    [_As MARIAN advances towards the couch._]

                                                He is asleep.
    Hush! Not a step further! Stay where you are! His life
    Hangs on a thread.

    MARIAN
                        Why do you stare upon me?
    What have you done? What's this that trickles down--

    [_Stoops to the floor and leaps back with a scream._]

    It is blood. You have killed him!

    ELINOR

    [_Seizes the bow and shoots. MARIAN falls._]

                                      Follow him--down to hell.
    King John will find you there.

    [_Exit. The scene grows dark._]

    MARIAN

    [_Lifts her head with a groan._]

                              I am dying, Robin!
    O God, I cannot wake him! Robin! Robin!
    Give me one word to take into the dark!
    He will not wake! He will not wake! O God,
    Help him!

    [_She falls back unconscious. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF, a green spray
    in his hand, opens the casement and stands for a moment
    in the window against the last glow of sunset, then
    enters and runs to the side of ROBIN._]

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Hurriedly._]

                Awake, awake, Robin, awake!
    The forest waits to help you! All the leaves
    Are listening for your bugle. Ah, where is it?
    Let but one echo sound and the wild flowers
    Will break thro' these grey walls and the green sprays
    Drag down these deadly towers. Wake, Robin, wake,
    And let the forest drown the priest's grey song
    With happy murmurs. Robin, the gates are open
    For you and Marian! All I had to give
    I have given to thrust them open, the dear gates
    Of fairyland which I shall never pass
    Again. I can no more, I am but a shadow,
    Dying as mortals die! It is not I
    That calls, not I, but Marian. Hear her voice!
    Robin, awake!
    O, master mine, farewell!

    [_Exit lingeringly through the casement._]

    ROBIN

    [_ROBIN is dimly seen in the mouth of the alcove. He stretches out
    his hands blindly in the dark._]

    Marian! Why do you call to me in dreams?
    Why do you call me? I must go. What's this?
    Help me, kind God, for I must say one word,
    Only one word--good-bye--to Marian,
    To Marian--Ah, too weak, too weak!

    [_He sees the dark body of MARIAN and utters a cry, falling on his
    knees beside her._]

                                      O God,
    Marian! Marian!
                      My bugle! Ah, my bugle!

    [_He rises to his feet and, drowning the distant organ-music, he
    blows a resounding forest-call. It is answered by several
    in the forest. He falls on his knees by MARIAN and
    takes her in his arms._]

    O Marian, Marian, who hath used thee so?

    MARIAN

    Robin, it is my death-wound. Ah, come close.

    ROBIN

    Marian, Marian, what have they done to thee?

    [_The OUTLAWS are heard thundering at the gates with cries._]

    OUTLAWS

    Robin! Robin! Robin! Break down the doors.

    [_The terrified nuns stream past the window, out of the chapel.
    The OUTLAWS rush into the room. The scene still
    darkens._]

    SCARLET

    Robin and Marian!

    LITTLE JOHN

                        Christ, what devil's hand
    Hath played the butcher here? Quick, hunt them down,
    They passed out yonder. Let them not outlive
    Our murdered king and queen.

    REYNOLD GREENLEAF

                                O Robin, Robin,
    Who shot this bitter shaft into her breast?

    [_Several stoop and kneel by the two lovers._]

    ROBIN HOOD

    Speak to me, Marian, speak to me, only speak!
    Just one small word, one little loving word
    Like those--do you remember?--you have breathed
    So many a time and often, against my cheek,
    Under the boughs of Sherwood, in the dark
    At night, with nothing but the boughs and stars
    Between us and the dear God up in heaven!
    O God, why does a man's heart take so long
    To break? It would break sooner if you spoke
    A word to me, a word, one small kind word.

    MARIAN

    Sweetheart!

    ROBIN

    Sweetheart! You have broken it, broken it! Oh, kind,
    Kind heart of Marian!

    MARIAN

                          Robin, come soon!

    [_Dies._]

    ROBIN

    Soon, sweetheart! Oh, her sweet brave soul is gone!
    Marian, I follow quickly!

    SCARLET

                              God, Kirklee
    Shall burn for this!

    LITTLE JOHN

                        Kirklee shall burn for this!
    O master, master, you shall be avenged!

    ROBIN

    No; let me stand upright! Your hand, good Scarlet!
    We have lived our lives and God be thanked we go
    Together thro' this darkness. We shall wake,
    Please God, together. It is growing darker!
    I cannot see your faces. Give me my bow
    Quickly into my hands, for my strength fails
    And I must shoot one last shaft on the trail
    Of yonder setting sun, never to reach it!
    But where this last, last bolt of all my strength,
    My hope, my love, shall fall, there bury us both,
    Together, and tread the green turf over us!
    The bow!

    [_SCARLET hands him his bow. He stands against the faint glow
    of the window, draws the bow to full length, shoots and
    falls back into the arms of LITTLE JOHN._]

    LITTLE JOHN

    [_Laying him down._]

          Weep, England, for thine outlawed lover,
    Dear Robin Hood, the poor man's friend, is dead.

    [_The scene becomes quite dark. Then out of the darkness, and as
    if at a distance, the voice of SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF is
    heard singing the fairy song of the first scene. The
    fairy glade in Sherwood begins to be visible in the gloom
    by the soft light of the ivory gates which are swinging
    open once more among the ferns. As the scene grows
    clearer the song of SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF grows more and
    more triumphant and is gradually caught up by the
    chorus of the fairy host within the woods._]

    [_Song of SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF._]

    I

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The world begins again!
              And O, the red of the roses,
                And the rush of the healing rain!

    II

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The Princess wakes from sleep;
              For the soft green keys of the wood-land
                Have opened her donjon-keep!

    III

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                Their grey walls hemmed us round;
              But, under my greenwood oceans,
                Their castles are trampled and drowned.

    IV

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                My green sprays climbed on high,
              And the ivy laid hold on their turrets
                And haled them down from the sky!

    V

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                They were strong! They are overthrown!
              For the little soft hands of the wild-flowers
                Have broken them, stone by stone.

    VI

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                Though Robin lie dead, lie dead,
              And the green turf by Kirklee
                Lie light over Marian's head,

    VII

    Green ferns on the crimson sky-line,
                What bugle have you heard?
              Was it only the peal of the blue-bells,
                Was it only the call of a bird?

    VIII

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The rose o'er the fortalice floats!
              My nightingales chant in their chapels,
                My lilies have bridged their moats!

    IX

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                King Death, in the light of the sun,
              Shrinks like an elfin shadow!
                His reign is over and done!

    X

    The hawthorn whitens the wood-land;
                My lovers, awake, awake,
              Shake off the grass-green coverlet,
                Glide, bare-foot, thro' the brake!

    XI

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                And, under the great green boughs,
              I have found out a place for my lovers,
                I have built them a beautiful house.

    XII

    Green ferns in the dawn-red dew-fall,
                This gift by my death I give,--
              They shall wander immortal thro' Sherwood!
                In my great green house they shall live!

    XIII

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                When the first wind blows from the South,
              They shall meet by the Gates of Faërie!
                She shall set her mouth to his mouth!

    XIV

    He shall gather her, fold her and keep her;
                They shall pass thro' the Gates, they shall live!
              For the Forest, the Forest has conquered!
                This gift by my death I give!

    XV

    The Forest has conquered! The Forest has conquered!
      The Forest has conquered!
                The world awakes anew;
              And O, the scent of the hawthorn,
                And the drip of the healing dew!

    [_The song ceases. TITANIA and OBERON come out into the moon-lit
    glade._]

    OBERON

    Yet one night more the gates of fairyland
    Are opened by a mortal's kindly deed.
    But Robin Hood and Marian now are driven
    As we shall soon be driven, from the world
    Of cruel mortals.

    TITANIA

                    Mortals call them dead;
    Oberon, what is death?

    OBERON

                            Only a sleep.
    But these may dream their happy dreams in death
    Before they wake to that new lovely life
    Beyond the shadows; for poor Shadow-of-a-Leaf
    Has given them this by love's eternal law
    Of sacrifice, and they shall enter in
    To dream their lover's dream in fairyland.

    TITANIA

    And Shadow-of-a-Leaf?

    OBERON

                          He cannot enter now.
    The gates are closed against him.

    TITANIA

                                    But is this
    For ever?

    OBERON
               We fairies have not known or heard
    What waits for those who, like this wandering Fool,
    Throw all away for love. But I have heard
    There is a great King, out beyond the world,
    Not Richard, who is dead, nor yet King John;
    But a great King who one day will come home
    Clothed with the clouds of heaven from His Crusade.

    TITANIA

    The great King!

    OBERON

                    Hush, the poor dark mortals come!

    [_The crowd of serfs, old men, poor women, and children, begin to
    enter as the fairy song swells up within the gates again.
    ROBIN and MARIAN are led along by a crowd of fairies
    at the end of the procession._]

    TITANIA

    And there, see, there come Robin and his bride.
    And the fairies lead them on, strewing their path
    With ferns and moon-flowers. See, they have entered in!

    [_The last fairy vanishes thro' the gates._]

    OBERON

    And we must follow, for the gates may close
    For ever now. Hundreds of years may pass
    Before another mortal gives his life
    To help the poor and needy.

    [_OBERON and TITANIA follow hand in hand thro' the gates. They
    begin to close. SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF steals wistfully
    and hesitatingly across, as if to enter. They close
    in his face. He goes up to them and leans against
    them sobbing, a small green figure, looking like a
    greenwood spray against their soft ivory glow. The
    fairy music dies. He sinks to his knees and holds up
    his hands. Immediately a voice is heard singing and
    drawing nearer thro' the forest._]

    [_Song--drawing nearer._]

    Knight on the narrow way,
      Where wouldst thou ride?
    "Onward," I heard him say,
      "Love, to thy side!"

    "Nay," sang a bird above,
      "Stay, for I see
    Death in the mask of love
      Waiting for thee."

    [_Enter BLONDEL, leading a great white steed. He stops and looks
    at the kneeling figure._]

    BLONDEL

    Shadow-of-a-Leaf!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_Rising to his feet._]

                      Blondel!

    BLONDEL

                              I go to seek
    My King!

    SHADOW-OF-A-LEAF

    [_In passionate grief._]

            The King is dead!

    BLONDEL

    [_In yet more passionate joy and triumph._]

                        The great King lives!

    [_Then more tenderly._]

    Will you not come and look for Him with me?

    [_They go slowly together through the forest and are lost to sight.
    BLONDEL'S voice is heard singing the third stanza
    of the song in the distance, further and further away._]

    "Death? What is Death?" he cried.
          "I must ride on!"

    [_Curtain._]




TALES OF THE MERMAID TAVERN


I

A KNIGHT OF THE OCEAN-SEA

    Under that foggy sunset London glowed,
    Like one huge cob-webbed flagon of old wine.
    And, as I walked down Fleet Street, the soft sky
    Mowed thro' the roaring thoroughfares, transfused
    Their hard sharp outlines, blurred the throngs of black
    On either pavement, blurred the rolling stream
    Of red and yellow busses, till the town
    Turned to a golden suburb of the clouds.
    And, round that mighty bubble of St. Paul's,
    Over the up-turned faces of the street,
    An air-ship slowly sailed, with whirring fans,
    A voyager in the new-found realms of gold,
    A shadowy silken chrysalis whence should break
    What radiant wings in centuries to be.

    So, wandering on, while all the shores of Time
    Softened into Eternity, it seemed
    A dead man touched me with his living hand,
    A flaming legend passed me in the streets
    Of London--laugh who will--that City of Clouds,
    Where what a dreamer yet, in spite of all,
    Is man, that splendid visionary child
    Who sent his fairy beacon through the dusk,
    On a blue bus before the moon was risen,--
    _This Night, at eight, The Tempest!_

                                             Dreaming thus,
    (Small wonder that my footsteps went astray!)
    I found myself within a narrow street,
    Alone. There was no rumour, near or far,
    Of the long tides of traffic. In my doubt
    I turned and knocked upon an old inn-door,
    Hard by, an ancient inn of mullioned panes,
    And crazy beams and over-hanging eaves:
    And, as I knocked, the slowly changing west
    Seemed to change all the world with it and leave
    Only that old inn steadfast and unchanged,
    A rock in the rich-coloured tides of time.

    And, suddenly, as a song that wholly escapes
    Remembrance, at one note, wholly returns,
    There, as I knocked, memory returned to me.
    I knew it all--the little twisted street,
    The rough wet cobbles gleaming, far away,
    Like opals, where it ended on the sky;
    And, overhead, the darkly smiling face
    Of that old wizard inn; I knew by rote
    The smooth sun-bubbles in the worn green paint
    Upon the doors and shutters.

                                  There was one
    Myself had idly scratched away one dawn,
    One mad May-dawn, three hundred years ago,
    When out of the woods we came with hawthorn boughs
    And found the doors locked, as they seemed to-night.
    Three hundred years ago--nay, Time was dead!
    No need to scan the sign-board any more
    Where that white-breasted siren of the sea
    Curled her moon-silvered tail among such rocks
    As never in the merriest seaman's tale
    Broke the blue-bliss of fabulous lagoons
    Beyond the Spanish Main.

                                And, through the dream,
    Even as I stood and listened, came a sound
    Of clashing wine-cups: then a deep-voiced song
    Made the old timbers of the Mermaid Inn
    Shake as a galleon shakes in a gale of wind
    When she rolls glorying through the Ocean-sea.


    SONG

    I

    Marchaunt Adventurers, chanting at the windlass,
      Early in the morning, we slipped from Plymouth Sound,
    All for Adventure in the great New Regions,
      All for Eldorado and to sail the world around!
    Sing! the red of sun-rise ripples round the bows again.
      Marchaunt Adventurers, O sing, we're outward bound,
    All to stuff the sunset in our old black galleon,
      All to seek the merchandise that no man ever found.

    _Chorus:_ Marchaunt Adventurers!
              Marchaunt Adventurers!

      Marchaunt Adventurers, O, whither are ye bound?--
    All for Eldorado and the great new Sky-line,
      All to seek the merchandise that no man ever found.


    II

    Marchaunt Adventurers, O, what'ull ye bring home again?--
      Wonders and works and the thunder of the sea!
    Whom will ye traffic with?--The King of the Sunset!
      What shall be your pilot then?--A wind from Galilee.
    Nay, but ye be marchaunts, will ye come back empty-handed?--
      Ay, we be marchaunts, though our gain we ne'er shall see.
    Cast we now our bread upon the waste wild waters.
      After many days, it shall return with usury.

    _Chorus:_ Marchaunt Adventurers!
              Marchaunt Adventurers!

      What shall be your profit in the mighty days to be?--
    Englande!--Englande!--Englande!--Englande!--
      Glory everlasting and the lordship of the sea!

            And there, framed in the lilac patch of sky
            That ended the steep street, dark on its light,
            And standing on those glistering cobblestones
            Just where they took the sunset's kiss, I saw
            A figure like foot-feathered Mercury,
            Tall, straight and splendid as a sunset-cloud.

    Clad in a crimson doublet and trunk-hose,
    A rapier at his side; and, as he paused,
    His long fantastic shadow swayed and swept
    Against my feet.

                      A moment he looked back,
    Then swaggered down as if he owned a world
    Which had forgotten--did I wake or dream?--
    Even his gracious ghost!

                              Over his arm
    He swung a gorgeous murrey-coloured cloak
    Of Ciprus velvet, caked and smeared with mud
    As on the day when--did I dream or wake?
    And had not all this happened once before?--
    When he had laid that cloak before the feet
    Of Gloriana! By that mud-stained cloak,
    'Twas he! Our Ocean-Shepherd! Walter Raleigh!
    He brushed me passing, and with one vigorous thrust
    Opened the door and entered. At his heels
    I followed--into the Mermaid!--through three yards
    Of pitch-black gloom, then into an old inn-parlour
    Swimming with faces in a mist of smoke
    That up-curled, blue, from long Winchester pipes,
    While--like some rare old picture, in a dream
    Recalled--quietly listening, laughing, watching,
    Pale on that old black oaken wainscot floated
    One bearded oval face, young, with deep eyes,
    Whom Raleigh hailed as "Will!"

                                    But as I stared
    A sudden buffet from a brawny hand
    Made all my senses swim, and the room rang
    With laughter as upon the rush-strewn floor
    My feet slipped and I fell. Then a gruff voice
    Growled over me--"Get up now, John-a-dreams,
    Or else mine host must find another drawer!
    Hast thou not heard us calling all this while?"
    And, as I scrambled up, the rafters rang
    With cries of "Sack! Bring me a cup of sack!
    Canary! Sack! Malmsey! and Muscadel!"
    I understood and flew. I was awake,
    A leather-jerkined pot-boy to these gods,
    A prentice Ganymede to the Mermaid Inn!

    There, flitting to and fro with cups of wine,
    I heard them toss the Chrysomelan names
    From mouth to mouth--Lyly and Peele and Lodge,
    Kit Marlowe, Michael Drayton, and the rest,
    With Ben, rare Ben, brick-layer Ben, who rolled
    Like a great galleon on his ingle-bench.
    Some twenty years of age he seemed; and yet
    This young Gargantua with the bull-dog jaws,
    The T, for Tyburn, branded on his thumb,
    And grim pock-pitted face, was growling tales
    To Dekker that would fright a buccaneer.--
    How in the fierce Low Countries he had killed
    His man, and won that scar on his bronzed fist;
    Was taken prisoner, and turned Catholick;
    And, now returned to London, was resolved
    To blast away the vapours of the town
    With Boreas-throated plays of thunderous mirth.
    "I'll thwack their Tribulation-Wholesomes, lad,
    Their Yellow-faced Envies and lean Thorns-i'-the-Flesh,
    At the _Black-friars Theatre_, or _The Rose_,
    Or else _The Curtain_. Failing these, I'll find
    Some good square inn-yard with wide galleries,
    And windows level with the stage. 'Twill serve
    My Comedy of Vapours; though, I grant.
    For Tragedy a private House is best,
    Or, just as Burbage tip-toes to a deed
    Of blood, or, over your stable's black half-door,
    Marked _Battlements_ in white chalk, your breathless David
    Glowers at the whiter Bathsheba within,
    Some humorous coach-horse neighs a 'hallelujah'!
    And the pit splits its doublets. Over goes
    The whole damned apple-barrel, and the yard
    Is all one rough and tumble, scramble and scratch
    Of prentices, green madams, and cut-purses
    For half-chewed Norfolk pippins. Never mind!
    We'll build the perfect stage in Shoreditch yet.
    And Will, there, hath half promised I shall write
    A piece for his own company! What d'ye think
    Of _Venus and Adonis_, his first heir,
    Printed last week? A bouncing boy, my lad!
    And he's at work on a Midsummer's Dream
    That turns the world to fairyland!"

                                        All these
    And many more were there, and all were young!
    There, as I brimmed their cups, I heard the voice
    Of Raleigh ringing across the smoke-wreathed room,--
    "Ben, could you put a frigate on the stage,
    I've found a tragedy for you. Have you heard
    The true tale of Sir Humphrey Gilbert?"

                                            "No!"

    "Why, Ben, of all the tragical affairs
    Of the Ocean-sea, and of that other Ocean
    Where all men sail so blindly, and misjudge
    Their friends, their charts, their storms, their stars, their God,
    If there be truth in the blind crowder's song
    I bought in Bread Street for a penny, this
    Is the brief type and chronicle of them all.
    Listen!" Then Raleigh sent these rugged rhymes
    Of some blind crowder rolling in great waves
    Of passion across the gloom. At each refrain
    He sank his voice to a broad deep undertone,
    As if the distant roar of breaking surf
    Or the low thunder of eternal tides
    Filled up the pauses of the nearer storm,
    Storm against storm, a soul against the sea:--


A KNIGHT OF THE OCEAN-SEA

    Sir Humphrey Gilbert, hard of hand,
      Knight-in-chief of the Ocean-sea,
    Gazed from the rocks of his New Found Land
      And thought of the home where his heart would be.

    He gazed across the wintry waste
      That weltered and hissed like molten lead,--
    "He saileth twice who saileth in haste!
      I'll wait the favour of Spring," he said.

          _Ever the more, ever the more,
          He heard the winds and the waves roar!
          Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    The yellow clots of foam went by
      Like shavings that curl from a ship-wright's plane,
    Clinging and flying, afar and nigh,
      Shuddering, flying and clinging again.

    A thousand bubbles in every one
      Shifted and shimmered with rainbow gleams;
    But--had they been planets and stars that spun
      He had let them drift by his feet like dreams:

    Heavy of heart was our Admirall,
      For, out of his ships--and they were but three!--
    He had lost the fairest and most tall,
      And--he was a Knight of the Ocean-sea.

          _Ever the more, ever the more,
          He heard the winds and the waves roar!
          Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    Heavy of heart, heavy of heart,
      For she was a galleon mighty as May,
    And the storm that ripped her glory apart
      Had stripped his soul for the winter's way;

    And he was aware of a whisper blown
      From foc'sle to poop, from windward to lee,
    That the fault was his, and his alone,
      And--he was a Knight of the Ocean-sea.

    "Had he done that! Had he done this!"
      And yet his mariners loved him well;
    But an idle word is hard to miss,
      And the foam hides more than the deep can tell.

    And the deep had buried his best-loved books,
      With many a hard-worn chart and plan:
    And a king that is conquered must see strange looks,
      So bitter a thing is the heart of man!

    And--"Who will you find to pay your debt?
      For a venture like this is a costly thing!
    Will they stake yet more, tho' your heart be set
      On the mightier voyage you planned for the Spring?"

    He raised his head like a Viking crowned,--
      "I'll take my old flag to her Majestie,
    And she will lend me ten thousand pound
      To make her Queen of the Ocean-sea!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            He heard the winds and the waves roar!
            Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    Outside--they heard the great winds blow!
      Outside--the blustering surf they heard,
    And the bravest there would ha' blenched to know
      That they must be taken at their own word.

    For the great grim waves were as molten lead
      --And he had two ships who sailed with three!--
    "And I sail not home till the Spring," he said,
      "They are all too frail for the Ocean-sea."

    But the trumpeter thought of an ale-house bench,
      And the cabin-boy longed for a Devonshire lane,
    And the gunner remembered a green-gowned wench,
      And the fos'cle whisper went round again,--

    "Sir Humphrey Gilbert is hard of hand,
      But his courage went down with the ship, may-be,
    And we wait for the Spring in a desert land,
      For--_he is afraid of the Ocean-sea_."

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            He heard the winds and the waves roar!
            Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    He knew, he knew how the whisper went!
      He knew he must master it, last or first!
    He knew not how much or how little it meant;
      But his heart was heavy and like to burst.

    "Up with your sails, my sea-dogs all!
      The wind has veered! And my ships," quoth he,
    "They will serve for a British Admirall
      Who is Knight-in-chief of the Ocean-sea!"

    His will was like a North-east wind
      That swept along our helmless crew;
    But he would not stay on the _Golden Hynde_,
      For that was the stronger ship of the two.

    "My little ship's-company, lads, hath passed
      Perils and storms a-many with me!
    Would ye have me forsake them at the last?
      They'll need a Knight of the Ocean-sea!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the winds and the waves roar!
            Thunder on thunder shook the shore._

    Beyond Cape Race, the pale sun splashed
      The grim grey waves with silver light
    Where, ever in front, his frigate crashed
      Eastward, for England and the night.

    And still as the dark began to fall,
      Ever in front of us, running free,
    We saw the sails of our Admirall
      Leading us home through the Ocean-sea.

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the winds and the waves roar!
            But he sailed on, sailed on before._

    On Monday, at noon of the third fierce day
      A-board our _Golden Hynde_ he came,
    With a trail of blood, marking his way
      On the salt wet decks as he walked half-lame.

    For a rusty nail thro' his foot had pierced.
      "Come, master-surgeon, mend it for me;
    Though I would it were changed for the nails that amerced
      The dying thief upon Calvary."

    The surgeon bathed and bound his foot,
      And the master entreated him sore to stay;
    But roughly he pulled on his great sea-boot
      With--"The wind is rising and I must away!"

    I know not why so little a thing,
      When into his pinnace we helped him down,
    Should make our eyelids prick and sting
      As the salt spray were into them blown,

    But he called as he went--"Keep watch and steer
      By my lanthorn at night!" Then he waved his hand
    With a kinglier watch-word, "We are as near
      To heaven, my lads, by sea as by land!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the gathering tempest roar!
            But he sailed on, sailed on before._

    Three hundred leagues on our homeward road,
      We strove to signal him, swooping nigh,
    That he would ease his decks of their load
      Of nettings and fights and artillery.

    And dark and dark that night 'gan fall,
      And high the muttering breakers swelled,
    Till that strange fire which seamen call
      "Castor and Pollux," we beheld,

    An evil sign of peril and death,
      Burning pale on the high main-mast;
    But calm with the might of Gennesareth
      Our Admirall's voice went ringing past,

    Clear thro' the thunders, far and clear,
      Mighty to counsel, clear to command,
    Joyfully ringing, "We are as near
      To heaven, my lads, by sea as by land!"

            _Ever the more, ever the more,
            We heard the rising hurricane roar!
            But he sailed on, sailed on before._

    And over us fled the fleet of the stars,
      And, ever in front of us, far or nigh,
    The lanthorn on his cross-tree spars
      Dipped to the Pit or soared to the Sky!

    'Twould sweep to the lights of Charles's Wain,
      As the hills of the deep 'ud mount and flee.
    Then swoop down vanishing cliffs again
      To the thundering gulfs of the Ocean-sea.

    We saw it shine as it swooped from the height,
      With ruining breakers on every hand,
    Then--a cry came out of the black mid-night,
      _As near to heaven by sea as by land!_

    And the light was out! Like a wind-blown spark;
      All in a moment! And we--and we--
    Prayed for his soul as we swept thro' the dark:
      For he was a Knight of the Ocean-sea.

            _Over our fleets for evermore
            The winds 'ull triumph and the waves roar!
            But he sails on, sails on before!_

    Silence a moment held the Mermaid Inn,
    Then Michael Drayton, raising a cup of wine,
    Stood up and said,--"Since many have obtained
    Absolute glory that have done great deeds,
    But fortune is not in the power of man,
    So they that, truly attempting, nobly fail,
    Deserve great honour of the common-wealth.
    Such glory did the Greeks and Romans give
    To those that in great enterprises fell
    Seeking the true commodity of their country
    And profit to all mankind; for, though they failed,
    Being by war, death, or some other chance,
    Hindered, their images were set up in brass,
    Marble and silver, gold and ivory,
    In solemn temples and great palace-halls,
    No less to make men emulate their virtues
    Than to give honour to their just deserts.
    God, from the time that He first made the world,
    Hath kept the knowledge of His Ocean-sea
    And the huge Æquinoctiall Continents
    Reserved unto this day. Wherefore I think
    No high exploit of Greece and Rome but seems
    A little thing to these Discoveries
    Which our adventurous captains even now
    Are making, out there, Westward, in the night,
    Captains most worthy of commendation,
    Hugh Willoughby--God send him home again
    Safe to the Mermaid!--and Dick Chauncellor,
    That excellent pilot. Doubtless this man, too,
    Sir Humphrey Gilbert, was worthy to be made
    Knight of the Ocean-sea. I bid you all
    Stand up, and drink to his immortal fame!"


II

A COINER OF ANGELS


    Some three nights later, thro' the thick brown fog,
    A link-boy, dropping flakes of crimson fire,
    Flared to the door and, through its glowing frame,
    Ben Jonson and Kit Marlowe, arm in arm,
    Swaggered into the Mermaid Inn and called
    For red-deer pies.
                             There, as they supped, I caught
    Scraps of ambrosial talk concerning Will,
    His _Venus and Adonis_.
                                  "Gabriel thought
    'Twas wrong to change the old writers and create
    A cold Adonis."
                            --"Laws were made for Will,
    Not Will for laws, since first he stole a buck
    In Charlecote woods."
                           --"Where never a buck chewed fern,"
    Laughed Kit, "unless it chewed the fern seed, too,
    And walked invisible."
                            "Bring me some wine," called Ben,
    And, with his knife thrumming upon the board,
    He chanted, while his comrade munched and smiled.


    I

    Will Shakespeare's out like Robin Hood
      With his merry men all in green,
    To steal a deer in Charlecote wood
      Where never a deer was seen.


    II

    He's hunted all a night of June,
      He's followed a phantom horn,
    He's killed a buck by the light of the moon,
      Under a fairy thorn.


    III

    He's carried it home with his merry, merry band,
      There never was haunch so fine;
    For this buck was born in Elfin-land
      And fed upon sops-in-wine.


    IV

    This buck had browsed on elfin boughs
      Of rose-marie and bay,
    And he's carried it home to the little white house
      Of sweet Anne Hathaway.


    V

    "The dawn above your thatch is red!
      Slip out of your bed, sweet Anne!
    I have stolen a fairy buck," he said,
      "The first since the world began.


    VI

    "Roast it on a golden spit,
      And see that it do not burn;
    For we never shall feather the like of it
      Out of the fairy fern."


    VII

    She scarce had donned her long white gown
      And given him kisses four,
    When the surly Sheriff of Stratford-town
      Knocked at the little green door.


    VIII

    They have gaoled sweet Will for a poacher;
      But squarely he fronts the squire,
    With "When did you hear in your woods of a deer?
      Was it under a fairy briar?"


    IX

    Sir Thomas he puffs,--"If God thought good
      My water-butt ran with wine,
    Or He dropt me a buck in Charlecote wood,
      I wot it is mine, not thine!"


    X

    "If you would eat of elfin meat,"
      Says Will, "you must blow up your horn!
    Take your bow, and feather the doe
      That's under the fairy thorn!


    XI

    "If you would feast on elfin food,
      You've only the way to learn!
    Take your bow and feather the doe
      That's under the fairy fern!"


    XII

    They're hunting high, they're hunting low,
      They're all away, away,
    With horse and hound to feather the doe
      That's under the fairy spray!


    XIII

    Sir Thomas he raged! Sir Thomas he swore!
      But all and all in vain;
    For there never was deer in his woods before,
      And there never would be again!


    And, as I brought the wine--"This is my grace,"
    Laughed Kit, "Diana grant the jolly buck
    That Shakespeare stole were toothsome as this pie."

    He suddenly sank his voice,--"Hist, who comes here?
    Look--Richard Bame, the Puritan! O, Ben, Ben,
    Your Mermaid Inn's the study for the stage,
    Your only teacher of exits, entrances,
    And all the shifting comedy. Be grave!
    Bame is the godliest hypocrite on earth!
    Remember I'm an atheist, black as coal.
    He has called me Wormall in an anagram.
    Help me to bait him; but be very grave.
    We'll talk of Venus."
                           As he whispered thus,
    A long white face with small black-beaded eyes
    Peered at him through the doorway. All too well,
    Afterwards, I recalled that scene, when Bame,
    Out of revenge for this same night, I guessed,
    Penned his foul tract on Marlowe's tragic fate;
    And, twelve months later, I watched our Puritan
    Riding to Tyburn in the hangman's cart
    For thieving from an old bed-ridden dame
    With whom he prayed, at supper-time, on Sundays.

    Like a conspirator he sidled in,
    Clasping a little pamphlet to his breast,
    While, feigning not to see him, Ben began:--

    "Will's _Venus and Adonis_, Kit, is rare,
    A round, sound, full-blown piece of thorough work,
    On a great canvas, coloured like one I saw
    In Italy, by one--Titian! None of the toys
    Of artistry your lank-haired losels turn,
    Your Phyllida--Love-lies-bleeding--Kiss-me-Quicks,
    Your fluttering Sighs and Mark-how-I-break-my-beats,
    Begotten like this, whenever and how you list,
    Your Moths of verse that shrivel in every taper;
    But a sound piece of craftsmanship to last
    Until the stars are out. 'Tis twice the length
    Of Vergil's books--he's listening! Nay, don't look!--
    Two hundred solid stanzas, think of that;
    But each a square celestial brick of gold
    Laid level and splendid. I've laid bricks and know
    What thorough work is. If a storm should shake
    The Tower of London down, Will's house would stand.
    Look at his picture of the stallion,
    Nostril to croup, that's thorough finished work!"

    "'Twill shock our Tribulation-Wholesomes, Ben!
    Think of that kiss of Venus! Deep, sweet, slow,
    As the dawn breaking to its perfect flower
    And golden moon of bliss; then slow, sweet, deep,
    Like a great honeyed sunset it dissolves
    Away!"
              A hollow groan, like a bass viol,
    Resounded thro' the room. Up started Kit
    In feigned alarm--"What, Master Richard Bame!
    Quick, Ben, the good man's ill. Bring him some wine!
    Red wine for Master Bame, the blood of Venus
    That stained the rose!"
                            "White wine for Master Bame,"
    Ben echoed, "Juno's cream that" ... Both at once
    They thrust a wine-cup to the sallow lips
    And smote him on the back.
    "Sirs, you mistake!" coughed Bame, waving his hands
    And struggling to his feet,
                                "Sirs, I have brought
    A message from a youth who walked with you
    In wantonness, aforetime, and is now
    Groaning in sulphurous fires!"
                                    "Kit, that means hell!"
    "Yea, sirs, a pamphlet from the pit of hell,
    Written by Robert Greene before he died.
    Mark what he styles it--_A Groatsworth of Wit
    Bought with a Million of Repentance_!"
                                              "Ah,
    Poor Rob was all his life-time either drunk,
    Wenching, or penitent, Ben! Poor lad, he died
    Young. Let me see now, Master Bame, you say
    Rob Greene wrote this on earth before he died,
    And then you printed it yourself in hell!"
    "Stay, sir, I came not to this haunt of sin
    To make mirth for Beëlzebub!"
                                    "O, Ben,
    That's you!"
                    "'Swounds, sir, am I Beëlzebub?
    Ogs-gogs!" roared Ben, his hand upon his hilt!
    "Nay, sir, I signified the god of flies!
    I spake out of the scriptures!" snuffled Bame
    With deprecating eye.
                              "I come to save
    A brand that you have kindled at your fire,
    But not yet charred, not yet so far consumed,
    One Richard Cholmeley, who declares to all
    He was persuaded to turn atheist
    By Marlowe's reasoning. I have wrestled with him,
    But find him still so constant to your words
    That only you can save him from the fire."
    "Why, Master Bame," said Kit, "had I the keys
    To hell, the damned should all come out and dance
    A morrice round the Mermaid Inn to-night."
    "Nay, sir, the damned are damned!"
                                        "Come, sit you down!
    Take some more wine! You'd have them all be damned
    Except Dick Cholmeley. What must I unsay
    To save him?" A quick eyelid dropt at Ben.
    "Now tell me, Master Bame!"
                                 "Sir, he derides
    The books of Moses!"
                               "Bame, do you believe?--
    There's none to hear us but Beëlzebub--
    Do you believe that we must taste of death
    Because God set a foolish naked wench
    Too near an apple-tree, how long ago?
    Five thousand years? But there were men on earth
    Long before that!" "Nay, nay, sir, if you read
    The books of Moses...." "Moses was a juggler!"
    "A juggler, sir, how, what!" "Nay, sir, be calm!
    Take some more wine--the white, if that's too red!
    I never cared for Moses! Help yourself
    To red-deer pie. Good!
                                 All the miracles
    You say that he performed--why, what are they?
    I know one Heriots, lives in Friday Street,
    Can do much more than Moses! Eat your pie
    In patience, friend, the mouth of man performs
    One good work at a time. What says he, Ben?
    The red-deer stops his--what? Sticks in his gizzard?
    O--_led them through the wilderness_! No doubt
    He did--for forty years, and might have made
    The journey in six months. Believe me, sir,
    That is no miracle. Moses gulled the Jews!
    Skilled in the sly tricks of the Egyptians,
    Only one art betrayed him. Sir, his books
    Are filthily written. I would undertake--
    If I were put to write a new religion--
    A method far more admirable. Eh, what?
    _Gruel in the vestibule?_ Interpret, Ben!
    His mouth's too full! _O, the New Testament!_
    Why, there, consider, were not all the Apostles
    Fishermen and base fellows, without wit
    Or worth?"--again his eyelid dropt at Ben.--
    "The Apostle Paul alone had wit, and he
    Was a most timorous fellow in bidding us
    Prostrate ourselves to worldly magistrates
    Against our conscience! I shall fry for this?
    I fear no bugbears or hobgoblins, sir,
    And would have all men not to be afraid
    Of roasting, toasting, pitch-forks, or the threats
    Of earthly ministers, tho' their mouths be stuffed
    With curses or with crusts of red-deer pie!
    One thing I will confess--if I must choose--
    Give me the Papists that can serve their God
    Not with your scraps, but solemn ceremonies,
    Organs, and singing men, and shaven crowns.
    Your protestant is a hypocritical ass!"

    "Profligate! You blaspheme!" Up started Bame,
    A little unsteady now upon his feet,
    And shaking his crumpled pamphlet over his head!

    "Nay--if your pie be done, you shall partake
    A second course. Be seated, sir, I pray.
    We atheists will pay the reckoning!
    I had forgotten that a Puritan
    Will swallow Moses like a red-deer pie
    Yet choke at a wax-candle! Let me read
    Your pamphlet. What, 'tis half addressed to me!
    Ogs-gogs! Ben! Hark to this--the Testament
    Of poor Rob Greene would cut Will Shakespeare off
    With less than his own Groatsworth! Hark to this!"
    And there, unseen by them, a quiet figure
    Entered the room and beckoning me for wine
    Seated himself to listen, Will himself,
    While Marlowe read aloud with knitted brows.
    "'_Trust them not; for there is an upstart crow
    Beautified with our feathers!_'
                                  --O, he bids
    All green eyes open:--'_And, being an absolute
    Johannes fac-totum is in his own conceit
    The only Shake-scene in a country!_'"
                                       "Feathers!"
    Exploded Ben. "Why, come to that, he pouched
    Your eagle's feather of blank verse, and lit
    His Friar Bacon's little magic lamp
    At the Promethean fire of Faustus. Jove,
    It was a faery buck, indeed, that Will
    Poached in that greenwood."
                                "Ben, see that you walk
    Like Adam, naked! Nay, in nakedness
    Adam was first. Trust me, you'll not escape
    This calumny! Vergil is damned--he wears
    A hen-coop round his waist, nicked in the night
    From Homer! Plato is branded for a thief,
    Why, he wrote Greek! And old Prometheus, too,
    Who stole his fire from heaven!"
                                   "Who printed it?"
    "Chettle! I know not why, unless he too
    Be one of those same dwarfs that find the world
    Too narrow for their jealousies. Ben, Ben,
    I tell thee 'tis the dwarfs that find no world
    Wide enough for their jostling, while the giants,
    The gods themselves, can in one tavern find
    Room wide enough to swallow the wide heaven
    With all its crowded solitary stars."

    "Why, then, the Mermaid Inn should swallow this,"
    The voice of Shakespeare quietly broke in,
    As laying a hand on either shoulder of Kit
    He stood behind him in the gloom and smiled
    Across the table at Ben, whose eyes still blazed
    With boyhood's generous wrath. "Rob was a poet.
    And had I known ... no matter! I am sorry
    He thought I wronged him. His heart's blood beats in this.
    Look, where he says he dies forsaken, Kit!"
    "Died drunk, more like," growled Ben. "And if he did,"
    Will answered, "none was there to help him home,
    Had not a poor old cobbler chanced upon him,
    Dying in the streets, and taken him to his house,
    And let him break his heart on his own bed.
    Read his last words. You know he left his wife
    And played the moth at tavern tapers, burnt
    His wings and dropt into the mud. Read here,
    His dying words to his forsaken wife,
    Written in blood, Ben, blood. Read it, '_I charge thee,
    Doll, by the love of our youth, by my soul's rest,
    See this man paid! Had he not succoured me
    I had died in the streets._' How young he was to call
    Thus on their poor dead youth, this withered shadow
    That once was Robin Greene. He left a child--
    See--in its face he prays her not to find
    The father's, but her own. '_He is yet green
    And may grow straight_,' so flickers his last jest,
    Then out for ever. At the last he begged
    A penny-pott of malmsey. In the bill,
    All's printed now for crows and daws to peck,
    You'll find four shillings for his winding sheet.
    He had the poet's heart and God help all
    Who have that heart and somehow lose their way
    For lack of helm, souls that are blown abroad
    By the great winds of passion, without power
    To sway them, chartless captains. Multitudes ply
    Trimly enough from bank to bank of Thames
    Like shallow wherries, while tall galleons,
    Out of their very beauty driven to dare
    The uncompassed sea, founder in starless nights,
    And all that we can say is--'They died drunk!'"

    "I have it from veracious witnesses,"
    Bame snuffled, "that the death of Robert Greene
    Was caused by a surfeit, sir, of Rhenish wine
    And pickled herrings. Also, sir, that his shirt
    Was very foul, and while it was at wash
    He lay i' the cobbler's old blue smock, sir!"
                                                "Gods,"
    The voice of Raleigh muttered nigh mine ear,
    "I had a dirty cloak once on my arm;
    But a Queen's feet had trodden it! Drawer, take
    Yon pamphlet, have it fried in cod-fish oil
    And bring it hither. Bring a candle, too,
    And sealing-wax! Be quick. The rogue shall eat it,
    And then I'll seal his lips."
                                  "No--not to-night,"
    Kit whispered, laughing, "I've a prettier plan
    For Master Bame."
                          "As for that scrap of paper,"
    The voice of Shakespeare quietly resumed,
    "Why, which of us could send his heart and soul
    Thro' Caxton's printing-press and hope to find
    The pretty pair unmangled. I'll not trust
    The spoken word, no, not of my own lips,
    Before the Judgment Throne against myself
    Or on my own defence; and I'll not trust
    The printed word to mirror Robert Greene.
    See--here's another Testament, in blood,
    Written, not printed, for the Mermaid Inn.
    Rob sent it from his death-bed straight to me.
    Read it. 'Tis for the Mermaid Inn alone;
    And when 'tis read, we'll burn it, as he asks."

    Then, from the hands of Shakespeare, Marlowe took
    A little scroll, and, while the winds without
    Rattled the shutters with their ghostly hands
    And wailed among the chimney-tops, he read:--

          Greeting to all the Mermaid Inn
          From their old Vice and Slip of Sin,
          Greeting, Ben, to you, and you
          Will Shakespeare and Kit Marlowe, too.
          Greeting from your Might-have-been,
          Your broken sapling, Robert Greene.

          Read my letter--'Tis my last,
          Then let Memory blot me out,
          I would not make my maudlin past
          A trough for every swinish snout.

      First, I leave a debt unpaid,
      It's all chalked up, not much all told,
      For Bread and Sack. When I am cold,
      Doll can pawn my Spanish blade
      And pay mine host. She'll pay mine'host!
      But ... I have chalked up other scores
      In your own hearts, behind the doors,
      Not to be paid so quickly. Yet,
      O, if you would not have my ghost
      Creeping in at dead of night,
      Out of the cold wind, out of the wet,
      With weeping face and helpless fingers
      Trying to wipe the marks away,
      Read what I can write, still write,
      While this life within them lingers.
      Let me pay, lads, let me pay.

      _Item_, for a peacock phrase,
      Flung out in a sudden blaze,
      Flung out at his friend Shake-scene,
      By this ragged Might-have-been,
      This poor Jackdaw, Robert Greene.

      Will, I knew it all the while!
      And you know it--and you smile!
      My quill was but a Jackdaw's feather,
      While the quill that Ben, there, wields,
      Fluttered down thro' azure fields,
      From an eagle in the sun;
      And yours, Will, yours, no earth-born thing,
      A plume of rainbow-tinctured grain,
      Dropt out of an angel's wing.
      Only a Jackdaw's feather mine,
      And mine ran ink, and Ben's ran wine,
      And yours the pure Pierian streams.

      But I had dreams, O, I had dreams!
      Dreams, you understand me, Will;
      And I fretted at the tether
      That bound me to the lowly plain,
      Gnawed my heart out, for I knew
      Once, tho' that was long ago,
      I might have risen with Ben and you
      Somewhere near that Holy Hill
      Whence the living rivers flow.
      Let it pass. I did not know
      One bitter phrase could ever fly
      So far through that immortal sky
      --Seeing all my songs had flown so low--
      One envious phrase that cannot die
      From century to century.

    Kit Marlowe ceased a moment, and the wind,
    As if indeed the night were all one ghost,
    Wailed round the Mermaid Inn, then sent once more
    Its desolate passion through the reader's voice:--

      Some truth there was in what I said.
      Kit Marlowe taught you half your trade;
      And something of the rest you learned
      From me,--but all you took you earned.
      You took the best I had to give,
      You took my clay and made it live;
      And that--why that's what God must do!--
      My music made for mortal ears
      You flung to all the listening spheres.
      You took my dreams and made them true.
      And, if I claimed them, the blank air
      Might claim the breath I shape to prayer.
      I do not claim it! Let the earth
      Claim the thrones she brings to birth.
      Let the first shapers of our tongue
      Claim whate'er is said or sung,
      Till the doom repeal that debt
      And cancel the first alphabet.
      Yet when, like a god, you scaled
      The shining crags where my foot failed;
      When I saw my fruit of the vine
      Foam in the Olympian cup,
      Or in that broader chalice shine
      Blood-red, a sacramental drink,
      With stars for bubbles, lifted up,
      Through the universal night,
      Up to the celestial brink,
      Up to that quintessential Light
      Where God acclaimed you for the wine
      Crushed from those poor grapes of mine;
      O, you'll understand, no doubt,
      How the poor vine-dresser fell,
      How a pin-prick can let out
      All the bannered hosts of hell,
      Nay, a knife-thrust, the sharp truth--
      I had spilt my wine of youth,
      The Temple was not mine to build.
      My place in the world's march was filled.

      Yet--through all the years to come--
      Men to whom my songs are dumb
      Will remember them and me
      For that one cry of jealousy,
      That curse where I had come to bless,
      That harsh voice of unhappiness.
      They'll note the curse, but not the pang,
      Not the torment whence it sprang,
      They'll note the blow at my friend's back,
      But not the soul stretched on the rack.
      They'll note the weak convulsive sting,
      Not the crushed body and broken wing.

      _Item_, for my thirty years,
      Dashed with sun and splashed with tears,
      Wan with revel, red with wine,
      This Jack-o-lanthorn life of mine.
      Other wiser, happier men,
      Take the full three-score-and-ten,
      Climb slow, and seek the sun.
      Dancing down is soon done.
      Golden boys, beware, beware,--
      The ambiguous oracles declare
      Loving gods for those that die
      Young, as old men may; but I,
      Quick as was my pilgrimage,
      Wither in mine April age.

            _Item_, one groatsworth of wit,
            Bought at an exceeding price,
            Ay, a million of repentance.
            Let me pay the whole of it.
            Lying here these deadly nights,
            Lads, for me the Mermaid lights
            Gleam as for a castaway
            Swept along a midnight sea
            The harbour-lanthorns, each a spark,
            A pin-prick in the solid dark,
            That lets trickle through a ray
            Glorious out of Paradise,
            To stab him with new agony.
            Let me pay, lads, let me pay!
            Let the Mermaid pass the sentence:
            I am pleading guilty now,
            A dead leaf on the laurel-bough,
            And the storm whirls me away.

    Kit Marlowe ceased; but not the wailing wind
    That round and round the silent Mermaid Inn
    Wandered, with helpless fingers trying the doors,
    Like a most desolate ghost.

                                  A sudden throng
    Of players bustled in, shaking the rain
    From their plumed hats. "Veracious witnesses,"
    The snuffle of Bame arose anew, "declare
    It was a surfeit killed him, Rhenish wine
    And pickled herrings. His shirt was very foul.
    He had but one. His doublet, too, was frayed,
    And his boots broken ..."

                            "What! Gonzago, you!"
    A short fat player called in a deep voice
    Across the room and, throwing aside his cloak
    To show the woman's robe he wore beneath,
    Minced up to Bame and bellowed--"'Tis such men
    As you that tempt us women to our fall!"
    And all the throng of players rocked and roared,
    Till at a nod and wink from Kit a hush
    Held them again.

                       "Look to the door," he said,
    "Is any listening?" The young player crept,
    A mask of mystery, to the door and peeped.
    "All's well! The coast is clear!"
                                      "Then shall we tell
    Our plan to Master Bame?"
                                    Round the hushed room
    Went Kit, a pen and paper in his hand,
    Whispering each to read, digest, and sign,
    While Ben re-filled the glass of Master Bame.
    "And now," said Kit aloud, "what think you, lads?
    Shall he be told?" Solemnly one or two
    'Gan shake their heads with "Safety! safety! Kit!"
    "O, Bame can keep a secret! Come, we'll tell him!
    He can advise us how a righteous man
    Should act! We'll let him share an he approve.
    Now, Master Bame,--come closer--my good friend,
    Ben Jonson here, hath lately found a way
    Of--hush! Come closer!--coining money, Bame."
    "Coining!" "Ay, hush, now! Hearken! A certain sure
    And indiscoverable method, sir!
    He is acquainted with one Poole, a felon
    Lately released from Newgate, hath great skill
    In mixture of metals--hush!--and, by the help
    Of a right cunning maker of stamps, we mean
    To coin French crowns, rose-nobles, pistolettes,
    Angels and English shillings."
                                  For one breath
    Bame stared at him with bulging beetle-eyes,
    Then murmured shyly as a country maid
    In her first wooing, "Is't not against the law?"
    "Why, sir, who makes the law? Why should not Bame
    Coin his own crowns like Queen Elizabeth?
    She is but mortal! And consider, too,
    The good works it should prosper in your hands,
    Without regard to red-deer pies and wine
    White as the Milky Way. Such secrets, Bame,
    Were not good for the general; but a few
    Discreet and righteous palms, your own, my friend,
    And mine,--what think you?"
                                With a hesitant glance
    Of well-nigh child-like cunning, screwing his eyes,
    Bame laughed a little huskily and looked round
    At that grave ring of anxious faces, all
    Holding their breath and thrilling his blunt nerves
    With their stage-practice. "And no risk?" breathed Bame,
    "No risk at all?" "O, sir, no risk at all!
    We make the very coins. Besides, that part
    Touches not you. Yours is the honest face,
    That's all we want."
                          "Why, sir, if you be sure
    There is no risk ..."
                          "You'll help to spend it. Good!
    We'll talk anon of this, and you shall carry
    More angels in your pocket, master Bame,
    Than e'er you'll meet in heaven. Set hand on seal
    To this now, master Bame, to prove your faith.
    Come, all have signed it. Here's the quill, dip, write.
    Good!"
            And Kit, pocketing the paper, bowed
    The gull to the inn-door, saying as he went,--
    "You shall hear further when the plan's complete.
    But there's one great condition--not one word,
    One breath of scandal more on Robert Greene.
    He's dead; but he was one of us. The day
    You air his shirt, I air this paper, too."
    No gleam of understanding, even then,
    Illumed that long white face: no stage, indeed,
    Has known such acting as the Mermaid Inn
    That night, and Bame but sniggered, "Why, of course,
    There's good in all men; and the best of us
    Will make mistakes."
                        "But no mistakes in this,"
    Said Kit, "or all together we shall swing
    At Tyburn--who knows what may leap to light?--
    You understand? No scandal!" "Not a breath!"
    So, in dead silence, Master Richard Bame
    Went out into the darkness and the night,
    To ask, as I have heard, for many a moon,
    The price of malmsey-butts and silken hose,
    And doublets slashed with satin.
                                      As the door
    Slammed on his back, the pent-up laughter burst
    With echo and re-echo round the room,
    But ceased as Will tossed on the glowing hearth
    The last poor Testament of Robert Greene.
    All watched it burn. The black wind wailed and moaned
    Around the Mermaid as the sparks flew up.
    "God, what a night for ships upon the sea,"
    Said Raleigh, peering through the wet black panes,
    "Well--we may thank Him for the Little Red Ring!"
    "_The Little Red Ring_," cried Kit, "_the Little Red Ring!_"
    Then up stood Dekker on the old black settle.
    "Give it a thumping chorus, lads," he called,
    And sang this brave song of the Mermaid Inn:--


    I

          Seven wise men on an old black settle,
            Seven wise men of the Mermaid Inn,
          Ringing blades of the one right metal,
            What is the best that a blade can win?
          Bread and cheese, and a few small kisses?
            Ha! ha! ha! Would you take them--you?
          --Ay, if Dame Venus would add to her blisses
            A roaring fire and a friend or two!

    _Chorus:_ Up now, answer me, tell me true!--
          --Ay, if the hussy would add to her blisses
            A roaring fire and a friend or two!


    II

          What will you say when the world is dying?
            What, when the last wild midnight falls
          Dark, too dark for the bat to be flying
            Round the ruins of old St. Paul's?
          What will be last of the lights to perish?
            What but the little red ring we knew,
          Lighting the hands and the hearts that cherish
            A fire, a fire, and a friend or two!

    _Chorus:_ Up now, answer me, tell me true!
          What will be last of the stars to perish?
            --The fire that lighteth a friend or two!


    III

          Up now, answer me, on your mettle
            Wisest man of the Mermaid Inn,
          Soberest man on the old black settle,
            Out with the truth! It was never a sin.--
          Well, if God saved me alone of the seven,
            Telling me _you_ must be damned, or _you_,
          "This," I would say, "This is hell, not heaven!
            Give me the fire and a friend or two!"

    _Chorus:_ Steel was never so ringing true:
          "God," we would say, "this is hell, not heaven!
            Give us the fire, and a friend or two!"


III

BLACK BILL'S HONEY-MOON

    The garlands of a Whitsun ale were strewn
    About our rushes, the night that Raleigh brought
    Bacon to sup with us. There, on that night,
    I saw the singer of the _Faërie Queen_
    Quietly spreading out his latest cantos
    For Shakespeare's eye, like white sheets in the sun.
    Marlowe, our morning-star, and Michael Drayton
    Talked in that ingle-nook. And Ben was there,
    Humming a song upon that old black settle:
             "Or leave a kiss but in the cup
             And I'll not ask for wine."
    But, meanwhile, he drank malmsey.
                                            Francis Bacon
    Straddled before the fire; and, all at once,
    He said to Shakespeare, in a voice that gripped
    The Mermaid Tavern like an arctic frost:

    "_There are no poets in this age of ours,
    Not to compare with Plautus. They are all
    Dead, the men that were famous in old days._"
    "Why--so they are," said Will. The humming stopped.
    I saw poor Spenser, a shy gentle soul,
    With haunted eyes like starlit forest pools,
    Smuggling his cantos under his cloak again.
    "There's verse enough, no doubt," Bacon went on,
    "But English is no language for the Muse.
    Whom would you call our best? There's Gabriel Harvey,
    And Edward, Earl of Oxford. Then there's Dyer,
    And Doctor Golding; while, for tragedy,
    Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, hath a lofty vein.
    And, in a lighter prettier vein, why, Will,
    There is _thyself!_ But--where's Euripides?"

    "Dead," echoed Ben, in a deep ghost-like voice.
    And drip--drip--drip--outside we heard the rain
    Miserably dropping round the Mermaid Inn.

    "Thy Summer's Night--eh, Will? Midsummer's Night?--
    That's a quaint fancy," Bacon droned anew,
    "But--Athens was an error, Will! Not Athens!
    Titania knew not Athens! Those wild elves
    Of thy Midsummer's Dream--eh? Midnight's Dream?--
    Are English all. Thy woods, too, smack of England;
    They never grew round Athens. Bottom, too,
    He is not Greek!"
                     "Greek?" Will said, with a chuckle,
    "Bottom a Greek? Why, no, he was the son
    Of Marian Hacket, the fat wife that kept
    An ale-house, Wincot-way. I lodged with her
    Walking from Stratford. You have never tramped
    Along that countryside? By Burton Heath?
    Ah, well, you would not know my fairylands.
    It warms my blood to let my home-spuns play
    Around your cold white Athens. There's a joy
    In jumping time and space."
                                     But, as he took
    The cup of sack I proffered, solemnly
    The lawyer shook his head. "Will, couldst thou use
    Thy talents with discretion, and obey
    Classic examples, those mightst match old Plautus,
    In all except priority of the tongue.
    This English tongue is only for an age,
    But Latin for all time. So I propose
    To embalm in Latin my philosophies.
    Well seize your hour! But, ere you die, you'll sail
    A British galleon to the golden courts
    Of Cleopatra."
                       "Sail it!" Marlowe roared,
    Mimicking in a fit of thunderous glee
    The drums and trumpets of his Tamburlaine:
    "And let her buccaneers bestride the sphinx,
    And play at bowls with Pharaoh's pyramids,
    And hale white Egypt with their tarry hands
    Home to the Mermaid! Lift the good old song
    That Rob Greene loved. Gods, how the lad would shout it!
    Stand up and sing, John Davis!"
                                       "Up!" called Raleigh,
    "Lift the chanty of Black Bill's Honey-moon, Jack!
    We'll keep the chorus going!"
                                     "Silence, all!"
    Ben Jonson echoed, rolling on his bench:
    "This gentle lawyer hath a longing, lads,
    To hear a right Homeric hymn. Now, Jack!
    But wet your whistle, first! A cup of sack
    For the first canto! Muscadel, the next!
    Canary for the last!" I brought the cup.
    John Davis emptied it at one mighty draught,
    Leapt on a table, stamped with either foot,
    And straight began to troll this mad sea-tale:


    CANTO THE FIRST

              Let Martin Parker at hawthorn-tide
                Prattle in Devonshire lanes,
              Let all his pedlar poets beside
                Rattle their gallows-chains,
              A tale like mine they never shall tell
                Or a merrier ballad sing,
              Till the Man in the Moon pipe up the tune
                And the stars play Kiss-in-the-Ring!

    _Chorus:_ Till Philip of Spain in England reign,
              And the stars play Kiss-in-the-Ring!

            All in the gorgeous dawn of day
              From grey old Plymouth Sound
            Our galleon crashed thro' the crimson spray
              To sail the world around:
            _Cloud i' the Sun_ was her white-scrolled name,--
              There was never a lovelier lass
            For sailing in state after pieces of eight
              With her bombards all of brass.

    _Chorus:_ Culverins, robinets, iron may-be;
              But her bombards all of brass!

            Now, they that go down to the sea in ships,
              Though piracy be their trade,
            For all that they pray not much with their lips
              They know where the storms are made:
            With the stars above and the sharks below,
              They need not parson or clerk;
            But our bo'sun Bill was an atheist still,
              Except--sometimes--in the dark!

    _Chorus:_ Now let Kit Marlowe mark!
            Our bo'sun Bill was an atheist still,
              Except--sometimes--in the dark!

            All we adventured for, who shall say,
              Nor yet what our port might be?--
            A magical city of old Cathay,
              Or a castle of Muscovy,
            With our atheist bo'sun, Bill, Black Bill,
              Under the swinging Bear,
            Whistling at night for a seaman to light
              His little poop-lanthorns there.

    _Chorus:_ On the deep, in the night, for a seaman to light
              His little lost lanthorns there.

            But, as over the Ocean-sea we swept,
              We chanced on a strange new land
            Where a valley of tall white lilies slept
              With a forest on either hand;
            A valley of white in a purple wood
              And, behind it, faint and far,
            Breathless and bright o'er the last rich height,
              Floated the sunset-star.

    _Chorus:_ Fair and bright o'er the rose-red height,
              Venus, the sunset-star.

            'Twas a marvel to see, as we beached our boat,
              Black Bill, in that peach-bloom air,
            With the great white lilies that reached to his throat
              Like a stained-glass bo'sun there,
            And our little ship's chaplain, puffing and red,
              A-starn as we onward stole,
            With the disk of a lily behind his head
              Like a cherubin's aureole.

    _Chorus:_ He was round and red and behind his head
              He'd a cherubin's aureole.

            "Hyrcania, land of honey and bees,
              We have found thee at last," he said,
            "Where the honey-comb swells in the hollow trees,"
              (O, the lily behind his head!)
            "The honey-comb swells in the purple wood!
              'Tis the swette which the heavens distil,
            Saith Pliny himself, on my little book-shelf!
              Is the world not sweet to thee, Bill?"

    _Chorus:_ "Saith Pliny himself, on my little book-shelf!
              Is the world not sweet to thee, Bill?"

            Now a man may taste of the devil's hot spice,
              And yet if his mind run back
            To the honey of childhood's Paradise
              His heart is not wholly black;
            And Bill, Black Bill, from the days of his youth,
              Tho' his chest was broad as an oak,
            Had cherished one innocent little sweet tooth,
              And it itched as our chaplain spoke.

    _Chorus:_ He had kept one perilous little tooth,
              And it itched as our chaplain spoke.

            All around was a mutter of bees,
              And Bill 'gan muttering too,--
            "If the honey-comb swells in the hollow trees,
              (What else can a Didymus do?)
            I'll steer to the purple woods myself
              And see if this thing be so,
            Which the chaplain found on his little book-shelf,
              For Pliny lived long ago."

    _Chorus:_ There's a platter of delf on his little book-shelf,
              And Pliny lived long ago.

            Scarce had he spoken when, out of the wood,
              And buffeting all around,
            Rooting our sea-boots where we stood,
              There rumbled a marvellous sound,
            As a mountain of honey were crumbling asunder,
              Or a sunset-avalanche hurled
            Honey-comb boulders of golden thunder
              To smother the old black world.

    _Chorus:_ Honey-comb boulders of musical thunder
              To mellow this old black world.

            And the chaplain he whispered--"This honey, one saith,
              On my camphired cabin-shelf,
            None may harvest on pain of death;
              For the bee would eat it himself!
            None walketh those woods but him whose voice
              In the dingles you then did hear!"
            "A VOICE?" growls Bill. "Ay, Bill, r-r-rejoice!
              'Twas the great Hyrcanian Bear!"

    _Chorus:_ Give thanks! _Re_-joice! 'Twas the glor-r-r-ious Voice
              Of the great Hyrcanian Bear!

             But, marking that Bill looked bitter indeed,
               For his sweet tooth hungered sore,
             "Consider," he saith, "that the Sweet hath need
               Of the Sour, as the Sea of the Shore!
             As the night to the day is our grief to our joy,
               And each for its brother prepares
             A banquet, Bill, that would otherwise cloy.
               Thus is it with honey and bears."

    _Chorus:_ Roses and honey and laughter would cloy!
              Give us thorns, too, and sorrow and bears!

             "Consider," he saith, "how by fretting a string
               The lutanist maketh sweet moan,
             And a bird ere it fly must have air for its wing
               To buffet or fall like a stone:
             Tho' you blacken like Pluto you make but more white
               These blooms which not Enna could yield!
             Consider, Black Bill, ere the coming of night,
                The lilies," he saith, "of the field."

    _Chorus:_ "Consider, Black Bill, in this beautiful light,
              The lilies," he saith, "of the field."

            "Consider the claws of a Bear," said Bill,
              "That can rip off the flesh from your bones,
            While his belly could cabin the skipper and still
              Accommodate Timothy Jones!
            Why, that's where a seaman who cares for his grog
              Perspires how this world isn't square!
            If there's _cause_ for a _cow_, if there's _use_ for a _dog_,
              By Pope John, there's no _Sense_ in a _Bear!_"

    _Chorus:_ Cause for a cow, use for a dog,
              By'r Lakin, no _Sense_ in a _Bear!_

            But our little ship's chaplain--"Sense," quoth he,
              "Hath the Bear tho' his making have none;
            For, my little book saith, by the sting of this bee
              Would Ursus be wholly foredone,
            But, or ever the hive he adventureth nigh
              And its crisp gold-crusted dome,
              He lardeth his nose and he greaseth his eye
              With a piece of an honey-comb."

    _Chorus:_ His velvety nose and his sensitive eye
               With a piece of an honey-comb.

            Black Bill at the word of that golden crust
              --For his ears had forgotten the roar,
            And his eyes grew soft with their innocent lust--
              'Gan licking his lips once more:
            "Be it bound like a missal and printed as fair,
              With capitals blue and red,
            'Tis a lie; for what honey could comfort a bear,
              Till the bear win the honey?" he said.

    _Chorus:_ "Ay, _whence_ the first honey wherewith the first bear
              First larded his nose?" he said.

            "Thou first metaphysical bo'sun, Bill,"
              Our chaplain quizzingly cried,
            "Wilt thou riddle me redes of a dumpling still
              With thy 'how came the apple inside'?"
            "Nay," answered Bill, "but I quest for truth,
              And I find it not on your shelf!
            I will face your Hyrcanian bear, forsooth,
              And look at his nose myself."

    _Chorus:_ For truth, for truth, or a little sweet tooth--
              I will into the woods myself.

            Breast-high thro' that foam-white ocean of bloom
              With its wonderful spokes of gold,
            Our sun-burnt crew in the rose-red gloom
              Like buccaneer galleons rolled:
            Breast-high, breast-high in the lilies we stood,
              And before we could say "good-night,"
            Out of the valley and into the wood
              He plunged thro' the last rich light.

    _Chorus:_ Out of the lilies and into the wood,
              Where the Great Bear walks all night!

            And our little ship's chaplain he piped thro' the trees
              As the moon rose, white and still,
            "Hylas, return to thy Heracles!"
              And we helped him with "Come back, Bill!"
              Thrice he piped it, thrice we halloo'd,
              And thrice we were dumb to hark;
            But never an answer came from the wood,
              So--we turned to our ship in the dark.

    _Chorus:_ Good-bye, Bill! you're a Didymus still;
              But--you're all alone in the dark.

            "This honey now"--as the first canto ceased,
            The great young Bacon pompously began--
            "Which Pliny calleth, as it were, the swette
            Of heaven, or spettle of the stars, is found
            In Muscovy. Now ..." "Bring the muscadel,"
            Ben Jonson roared--"'Tis a more purple drink,
            And suits with the next canto!"
                                              At one draught
            John Davis drained the cup, and with one hand
            Beating the measure, rapidly trolled again.


CANTO THE SECOND

                   Now, Rabelais, art thou quite foredone,
                   Dan Chaucer, Drayton, Every One!
                   Leave we aboard our _Cloud i' the Sun_
                     This crew of pirates dreaming--
                   Of Angels, minted in the blue
                   Like golden moons, Rose-nobles, too,
                   As under the silver-sliding dew
                     Our emerald creek lay gleaming!

    _Chorus:_   Under the stars lay gleaming!

                   And mailed with scales of gold and green
                   The high star-lilied banks between,
                   Nosing our old black hulk unseen,
                     Great alligators shimmered:
                   Blood-red jaws i' the blue-black ooze,
                   Where all the long warm day they snooze,
                   Chewing old cuds of pirate-crews,
                     Around us grimly glimmered.

    _Chorus:_   Their eyes like rubies glimmered.

                   Let us now sing of Bill, good sirs!
                   Follow him, all green forestéres,
                   Fearless of Hyrcanian bears
                     As of these ghostly lilies!
                   For O, not Drayton there could sing
                   Of wild Pigwiggen and his King
                   So merry a jest, so jolly a thing
                     As this my tale of Bill is.

    _Chorus:_   Into the woods where Bill is!

                   Now starts he as a white owl hoots,
                   And now he stumbles over roots,
                   And now beneath his big sea-boots
                     In yon deep glade he crunches
                   Black cakes of honey-comb that were
                   So elfin-sweet, perchance, last year;
                   But neither Bo'sun, now, nor Bear
                     At that dark banquet munches.

    _Chorus:_   Onward still he crunches!

                   Black cakes of honey-comb he sees
                   Above him in the forks of trees,
                   Filled by stars instead of bees,
                     With brimming silver glisten:
                   But ah, such food of gnome and fay
                   Could neither Bear nor Bill delay
                   Till where yon ferns and moonbeams play
                     He starts and stands to listen!

    _Chorus:_   What melody doth he listen?

                  Is it the Night-Wind as it comes
                   Through the wood and softly thrums
                   Silvery tabors, purple drums,
                     To speed some wild-wood revel?
                   Nay, Didymus, what faint sweet din
                   Of viol and flute and violin
                   Makes all the forest round thee spin,
                     The Night-Wind or the Devil?

    _Chorus:_   No doubt at all--the Devil!

                   He stares, with naked knife in hand,
                   This buccaneer in fairyland!
                   Dancing in a saraband
                     The red ferns reel about him!
                   Dancing in a morrice-ring
                   The green ferns curtsey, kiss and cling!
                   Their Marians flirt, their Robins fling
                     Their feathery heels to flout him!

    _Chorus:_   The whole wood reels about him.

                   Dance, ye shadows! O'er the glade,
                   Bill, the Bo'sun, undismayed,
                   Pigeon-toes with glittering blade!
                     Drake was never bolder!
                   Devil or Spaniard, what cares he
                   Whence your eerie music be?
                   Till--lo, against yon old oak-tree
                     He leans his brawny shoulder!

    _Chorus:_   He lists and leans his shoulder!

                   Ah, what melody doth he hear
                   As to that gnarled old tree-trunk there
                   He lays his wind-bit brass-ringed ear,
                     And steals his arm about it?
                   What Dryad could this Bo'sun win
                   To that slow-rippling amorous grin?--
                   'Twas full of singing bees within!
                     Not Didymus could doubt it!

    _Chorus:_   So loud they buzzed about it!

                   Straight, o'er a bough one leg he throws,
                   And up that oaken main-mast goes
                   With reckless red unlarded nose
                     And gooseberry eyes of wonder!
                   Till now, as in a galleon's hold,
                   Below, he sees great cells of gold
                   Whence all the hollow trunk up-rolled
                     A low melodious thunder.

    _Chorus:_   A sweet and perilous thunder!

                   Ay, there, within that hollow tree,
                   Will Shakespeare, mightst thou truly see
                   The Imperial City of the Bee,
                     In Chrysomelan splendour!
                   And, in the midst, one eight-foot dome
                   Swells o'er that Titan honey-comb
                   Where the Bee-Empress hath her home,
                     With such as do attend her,

    _Chorus:_   Weaponed with stings attend her!

                   But now her singing sentinels
                   Have turned to sleep in waxen cells,
                   And Bill leans down his face and smells
                     The whole sweet summer's cargo--
                   In one deep breath, the whole year's bloom,
                   Lily and thyme and rose and broom,
                   One Golden Fleece of flower-perfume
                     In that old oaken Argo.

    _Chorus:_   That green and golden Argo!

                   And now he hangs with dangling feet
                   Over that dark abyss of sweet,
                   Striving to reach such wild gold meat
                     As none could buy for money:
                   His left hand grips a swinging branch
                   When--crack! Our Bo'sun, stout and stanch,
                   Falls like an Alpine avalanche,
                     Feet first into the honey!

    _Chorus:_   Up to his ears in honey!

                   And now his red unlarded nose
                   And bulging eyes are all that shows
                   Above it, as he puffs and blows!
                     And now--to 'scape the scathing
                   Of that black host of furious bees
                   His nose and eyes he fain would grease
                   And bobs below those golden seas
                     Like an old woman bathing.

    _Chorus:_   Old Mother Hubbard bathing!

                   And now he struggles, all in vain,
                   To reach some little bough again;
                   But, though he heaves with might and main,
                     This honey holds his ribs, sirs,
                   So tight, a barque might sooner try
                   To steer a cargo through the sky
                   Than Bill, thus honey-logged, to fly
                     By flopping of his jib, sirs!

    _Chorus:_   His tops'l and his jib, sirs!

                   Like Oberon in the hive his beard
                   With wax and honey all besmeared
                   Would make the crescent moon afeard
                     That now is sailing brightly
                   Right o'er his leafy donjon-keep!
                   But that she knows him sunken deep,
                   And that his tower is straight and steep,
                     She would not smile so lightly.

    _Chorus:_   Look down and smile so lightly.

                   She smiles in that small heavenly space,
                   Ringed with the tree-trunk's leafy grace,
                   While upward grins his ghastly face
                     As if some wild-wood Satyr,
                   Some gnomish Ptolemy should dare
                   Up that dark optic tube to stare,
                   As all unveiled she floated there,
                     Poor maiden moon, straight at her!

    _Chorus:_   The buccaneering Satyr!

                   But there, till some one help him out,
                   Black Bill must stay, without a doubt.
                   "_Help! Help!_" he gives a muffled shout.
                     None but the white owls hear it!
                   _Who? Whoo?_ they cry: Bill answers "ME!
                   _I am stuck fast in this great tree!
                   Bring me a rope, good Timothy!
                     There's honey, lads, we'll share it!_"

    _Chorus:_   Ay, now he wants to share it.

                   Then, thinking help may come with morn,
                   He sinks, half-famished and out-worn,
                   And scarce his nose exalts its horn
                     Above that sea of glory!
                   But, even as he owns defeat,
                   His belly saith, "A man must eat,
                   And since there is none other meat,
                     Come, lap this mess before 'ee!"

    _Chorus:_   This glorious mess before 'ee.

                   Then Dian sees a right strange sight
                   As, bidding him a fond good-night,
                   She flings a silvery kiss to light
                     In that deep oak-tree hollow,
                   And finds that gold and crimson nose
                   A moving, munching, ravenous rose
                   That up and down unceasing goes,
                     Save when he stops to swallow!

    _Chorus:_   He finds it hard to swallow!

                   Ay, now his best becomes his worst,
                   For honey cannot quench his thirst,
                   Though he should eat until he burst;
                     But, ah, the skies are kindly,
                   And from their tender depths of blue
                   They send their silver-sliding dew.
                   So Bill thrusts out his tongue anew
                     And waits to catch it--blindly!

    _Chorus:_   For ah, the stars are kindly!

                   And sometimes, with a shower of rain,
                   They strive to ease their prisoner's pain:
                   Then Bill thrusts out his tongue again
                     With never a grace, the sinner!
                   And day and night and day goes by,
                   And never a comrade comes anigh,
                   And still the honey swells as high
                     For supper, breakfast, dinner!

    _Chorus:_   Yet Bill has grown no thinner!

                   The young moon grows to full and throws
                   Her buxom kiss upon his nose,
                   As nightly over the tree she goes,
                     And peeps and smiles and passes,
                   Then with her fickle silver flecks
                   Our old black galleon's dreaming decks;
                   And then her face, with nods and becks,
                     In midmost ocean glasses.

    _Chorus:_   'Twas ever the way with lasses!

                   Ah, Didymus, hast thou won indeed
                   That Paradise which is thy meed?
                   (Thy tale not all that run may read!)
                     Thy sweet hath now no leaven!
                   Now, like an onion in a cup
                   Of mead, thou liest for Jove to sup,
                   Could Polyphemus lift thee up
                     With Titan hands to heaven!

    _Chorus:_   This great oak-cup to heaven!

                 The second canto ceased; and, as they raised
                 Their wine-cups with the last triumphant note,
                 Bacon, undaunted, raised his grating voice--
                 "This honey which, in some sort, may be styled
                 The Spettle of the Stars ..." "Bring the Canary!"
                 Ben Jonson roared. "It is a moral wine
                 And suits the third, last canto!" At one draught
                 John Davis drained it and began anew.


CANTO THE THIRD

                   A month went by. We were hoisting sail!
                     We had lost all hope of Bill;
                   Though, laugh as you may at a seaman's tale,
                     He was fast in his honey-comb still!
                   And often he thinks of the chaplain's word
                     In the days he shall see no more,--
                   How the Sweet, indeed, of the Sour hath need;
                     And the Sea, likewise, of the Shore.

    _Chorus:_ The chaplain's word of the Air and a Bird;
                     Of the Sea, likewise, and the Shore!

                   "O, had I the wings of a dove, I would fly
                     To a heaven, of aloes and gall!
                   I have honeyed," he yammers, "my nose and mine eye,
                     And the bees cannot sting me at all!
                   And it's O, for the sting of a little brown bee,
                     Or to blister my hands on a rope,
                   Or to buffet a thundering broad-side sea
                     On a deck like a mountain-slope!"

    _Chorus:_ With her mast snapt short, and a list to port
                     And a deck like a mountain-slope.

                   But alas, and he thinks of the chaplain's voice
                     When that roar from the woods out-break--
                   _R-r-re-joice! R-r-re-joice!_ "Now, wherefore rejoice
                     In the music a bear could make?
                   'Tis a judgment, maybe, that I stick in this tree;
                     Yet in this I out-argued him fair!
                   Though I live, though I die, in this honey-comb pie,
                     By Pope Joan, there's no sense in a bear!"

    _Chorus:_ Notes in a nightingale, plums in a pie,
                     By'r Lakin, no _Sense_ in a _Bear_!

                   He knew not our anchor was heaved from the mud:
                     He was growling it over again,
                   When--a strange sound suddenly froze his blood,
                     And curdled his big slow brain!--
                   A marvellous sound, as of great steel claws
                     Gripping the bark of his tree,
                   Softly ascended! Like lightning ended
                     His honey-comb reverie!

    _Chorus:_ The honey-comb quivered! The little leaves shivered!
                     _Something was climbing the tree!_

                   Something that breathed like a fat sea-cook,
                     Or a pirate of fourteen ton!
                   But it clomb like a cat (tho' the whole tree shook)
                     Stealthily tow'rds the sun,
                   Till, as Black Bill gapes at the little blue ring
                     Overhead, which he calls the sky,
                   It is clean blotted out by a monstrous Thing
                     Which--_hath larded its nose and its eye._

    _Chorus:_ O, well for thee, Bill, that this monstrous Thing
                     Hath blinkered its little red eye.

                   Still as a mouse lies Bill with his face
                     Low down in the dark sweet gold,
                   While this monster turns round in the leaf-fringed space!
                     Then--taking a good firm hold,
                   As the skipper descending the cabin-stair,
                   Tail-first with a vast slow tread,
                   Solemnly, softly, cometh this Bear
                     Straight down o'er the Bo'sun's head.

    _Chorus:_ Solemnly--slowly--cometh this Bear,
                     Tail-first o'er the Bo'sun's head.

                   Nearer--nearer--then all Bill's breath
                     Out-bursts in one leap and yell!
                   And this Bear thinks, "Now am I gripped from beneath
                     By a roaring devil from hell!"
                   And madly Bill clutches his brown bow-legs,
                     And madly this Bear doth hale,
                   With his little red eyes fear-mad for the skies
                     And Bill's teeth fast in his tail!

    _Chorus:_   Small wonder a Bear should quail!
                   To have larded his nose, to have greased his eyes,
                     And be stung at the last in his tail.

                   Pull, Bo'sun! Pull, Bear! In the hot sweet gloom,
                     Pull Bruin, pull Bill, for the skies!
                   Pull--out of their gold with a bombard's boom
                     Come Black Bill's honeyed thighs!
                   Pull! Up! Up! Up! with a scuffle and scramble,
                     To that little blue ring of bliss,
                   This Bear doth go with our Bo'sun in tow
                     Stinging his tail, I wis.

    _Chorus:_ And this Bear thinks--"Many great bees I know,
                    But there never was Bee like this!"

                   All in the gorgeous death of day
                     We had slipped from our emerald creek,
                   And our _Cloud i' the Sun_ was careening away
                     With the old gay flag at the peak,
                   When, suddenly, out of the purple wood,
                     Breast-high thro' the lilies there danced
                   A tall lean figure, black as a nigger,
                     That shouted and waved and pranced!

    _Chorus:_ A gold-greased figure, but black as a nigger,
                    Waving his shirt as he pranced!

                   "'Tis Hylas! 'Tis Hylas!" our chaplain flutes,
                     And our skipper he looses a shout!
                   "'Tis Bill! Black Bill, in his old sea-boots!
                     _Stand by to bring her about!
                   Har-r-rd a-starboard!"_ And round we came,
                     With a lurch and a dip and a roll,
                   And a banging boom thro' the rose-red gloom
                     For our old Black Bo'sun's soul!

    _Chorus:_ Alive! Not dead! Tho' behind his head
                    He'd a seraphin's aureole!

          And our chaplain he sniffs, as Bill finished his tale,
            (With the honey still scenting his hair!)
          O'er a plate of salt beef and a mug of old ale--
            "By Pope Joan, there's no sense in a bear!"
          And we laughed, but our Bo'sun he solemnly growls
            --"Till the sails of yon heavens be furled,
          It taketh--now, mark!--all the beasts in the Ark,
            Teeth and claws, too, to make a good world!"

    Chorus: Till the great--blue--sails--be--furled,
           It taketh--now, mark!--all the beasts in the Ark,
             Teeth and claws, too, to make a good world!


           "Sack! Sack! Canary! Malmsey! Muscadel!"--
           As the last canto ceased, the Mermaid Inn
           Chorussed. I flew from laughing voice to voice;
           But, over all the hubbub, rose the drone
           Of Francis Bacon,--"Now, this Muscovy
           Is a cold clime, not favourable to bees
           (Or love, which is a weakness of the south)
           As well might be supposed. Yet, as hot lands
           Gender hot fruits and odoriferous spice,
           In this case we may think that honey and flowers
           Are comparable with the light airs of May
           And a more temperate region. Also we see,
           As Pliny saith, this honey being a swette
           Of heaven, a certain spettle of the stars,
           Which, gathering unclean vapours as it falls,
           Hangs as a fat dew on the boughs, the bees
           Obtain it partly thus, and afterwards
           Corrupt it in their stomachs, and at last
           Expel it through their mouths and harvest it
           In hives; yet, of its heavenly source it keeps
           A great part. Thus, by various principles
           Of natural philosophy we observe--"
           And, as he leaned to Drayton, droning thus,
           I saw a light gleam of celestial mirth
           Flit o'er the face of Shakespeare--scarce a smile--
           A swift irradiation from within
           As of a cloud that softly veils the sun.


IV

THE SIGN OF THE GOLDEN SHOE

    We had just set our brazier smouldering,
    To keep the Plague away. Many a house
    Was marked with the red cross. The bells tolled
    Incessantly. Nash crept into the room
    Shivering like a fragment of the night,
    His face yellow as parchment, and his eyes
    Burning.

             "The Plague! He has taken it!" voices cried.
    "That's not the Plague! The old carrion-crow is drunk;
    But stand away. What ails you, Nash my lad?"
    Then, through the clamour, as through a storm at sea,
    The master's voice, the voice of Ben, rang out,
    "Nash!"

            Ben leapt to his feet, and like a ship
    Shouldering the waves, he shouldered the throng aside.
    "What ails you, man? What's that upon your breast?
    Blood?"

            "Marlowe is dead," said Nash,
    And stunned the room to silence ...

                                        "Marlowe--dead!"
    Ben caught him by the shoulders. "Nash! Awake!
    What do you mean? Marlowe? Kit Marlowe? Dead?
    I supped with him--why--not three nights ago!
    You are drunk! You are dazed! There's blood upon your coat!"
    "That's--where he died," said Nash, and suddenly sank
    Sidelong across a bench, bowing his head
    Between his hands ...
    Wept, I believe. Then, like a whip of steel,
    His lean black figure sprang erect again.
    "Marlowe!" he cried, "Kit Marlowe, killed for a punk,
    A taffeta petticoat! Killed by an apple-squire!
    Drunk! I was drunk; but I am sober now,
    Sober enough, by God! Poor Kit is dead."

       *   *   *   *

    The Mermaid Inn was thronged for many a night
    With startled faces. Voices rose and fell,
    As I recall them, in a great vague dream,
    Curious, pitiful, angry, thrashing out
    The tragic truth. Then, all along the Cheape,
    The ballad-mongers waved their sheets of rhyme,
    Croaking: _Come buy! Come buy! The bloody death
    Of Wormall, writ by Master Richard Bame!
    Come buy! Come buy! The Atheist's Tragedy._
    And, even in Bread Street, at our very door,
    The crowder to his cracked old fiddle sang:--

                "_He was a poet of proud repute
                And wrote full many a play,
                Now strutting in a silken suit,
                Now begging by the way._"

    Then, out of the hubbub and the clash of tongues,
    The bawdy tales and scraps of balladry,
    (As out of chaos rose the slow round world)
    At last, though for the Mermaid Inn alone,
    Emerged some tragic semblance of a soul,
    Some semblance of the rounded truth, a world
    Glimpsed only through great mists of blood and tears,
    Yet smitten, here and there, with dreadful light,
    As I believe, from heaven.

                                Strangely enough,
    (Though Ben forgot his pipe and Will's deep eyes
    Deepened and softened, when they spoke of Kit,
    For many a month thereafter) it was Nash
    That took the blow like steel into his heart.
    Nash, our "Piers Penniless," whom Rob Greene had called
    "Young Juvenal," the first satirist of our age,
    Nash, of the biting tongue and subtle sneer,
    Brooded upon it, till his grief became
    Sharp as a rapier, ready to lunge in hate
    At all the lies of shallower hearts.

                                        One night,
    The night he raised the mists from that wild world,
    He talked with Chapman in the Mermaid Inn
    Of Marlowe's poem that was left half-sung,
    His _Hero and Leander_.

                                    "Kit desired,
    If he died first, that you should finish it,"
    Said Nash.

                A loaded silence filled the room
    As with the imminent spirit of the dead
    Listening. And long that picture haunted me:
    Nash, like a lithe young Mephistopheles
    Leaning between the silver candle-sticks,
    Across the oak table, with his keen white face,
    Dark smouldering eyes, and black, dishevelled hair;
    Chapman, with something of the steady strength
    That helms our ships, and something of the Greek,
    The cool clear passion of Platonic thought
    Behind the fringe of his Olympian beard
    And broad Homeric brows, confronting him
    Gravely.

             There was a burden of mystery
    Brooding on all that night; and, when at last
    Chapman replied, I knew he felt it, too.
    The curious pedantry of his wonted speech
    Was charged with living undertones, like truths
    Too strange and too tremendous to be breathed
    Save thro' a mask. And though, in lines that flamed
    Once with strange rivalry, Shakespeare himself defied
    Chapman, that spirit "by spirits taught to write
    Above a mortal pitch," Will's nimbler sense
    Was quick to breathings from beyond our world
    And could not hold them lightly.

                                    "Ah, then Kit,"
    Said Chapman, "had some prescience of his end,
    Like many another dreamer. What strange hints
    Of things past, present, and to come, there lie
    Sealed in the magic pages of that music
    Which, laying strong hold on universal laws,
    Ranges beyond these mud-walls of the flesh,
    Though dull wits fail to follow. It was this
    That made men find an oracle in the books
    Of Vergil, and an everlasting fount
    Of science in the prophets."

                                Once again
    That haunted silence filled the shadowy room;
    And, far away up Bread Street, we could hear
    The crowder, piping of black Wormall still:--

         "_He had a friend, once gay and green,
            Who died of want alone,
         In whose black fate he might have seen
           The warning of his own._"

    "Strange he should ask a hod-man like myself
    To crown that miracle of his April age,"
    Said Chapman, murmuring softly under breath,
    "_Amorous Leander, beautiful and young_ ...
    Why, Nash, had I been only charged to raise
    Out of its grave in the green Hellespont
    The body of that boy,
    To make him sparkle and leap thro' the cold waves
    And fold young Hero to his heart again,
    The task were scarce as hard.
                                 But ... stranger still,"--
    And his next words, although I hardly knew
    All that he meant, went tingling through my flesh--
    "Before you spoke, before I knew his wish,
    I had begun to write!
                           I knew and loved
    His work. Himself I hardly knew at all;
    And yet--I know him now! I have heard him now
    And, since he pledged me in so rare a cup,
    I'll lift and drink to him, though lightnings fall
    From envious gods to scourge me. I will lift
    This cup in darkness to the soul that reigns
    In light on Helicon. Who knows how near?
    For I have thought, sometimes, when I have tried
    To work his will, the hand that moved my pen
    Was mine, and yet--not mine. The bodily mask
    Is mine, and sometimes, dull as clay, it sleeps
    With old Musæus. Then strange flashes come,
    Oracular glories, visionary gleams,
    And the mask moves, not of itself, and sings."

    "I know that thought," said Nash. "A mighty ship,
    A lightning-shattered wreck, out in that night,
    Unseen, has foundered thundering. We sit here
    Snug on the shore, and feel the wash of it,
    The widening circles running to our feet.
    Can such a soul go down to glut the sharks
    Without one ripple? Here comes one sprinkle of spray.
    Listen!" And through that night, quick and intense,
    And hushed for thunder, tingled once again,
    Like a thin wire, the crowder's distant tune:--

         "_Had he been prenticed to the trade
           His father followed still,
         This exit he had never made,
           Nor played a part so ill._"

    "Here is another," said Nash, "I know not why;
    But like a weed in the long wash, I too
    Was moved, not of myself, to a tune like this.
    O, I can play the crowder, fiddle a song
    On a dead friend, with any the best of you.
    Lie and kick heels in the sun on a dead man's grave
    And yet--God knows--it is the best we can;
    And better than the world's way, to forget."
    So saying, like one that murmurs happy words
    To torture his own grief, half in self-scorn,
    He breathed a scrap of balladry that raised
    The mists a moment from that Paradise,
    That primal world of innocence, where Kit
    In childhood played, outside his father's shop,
    Under the sign of the _Golden Shoe_, as thus:--

        A cobbler lived in Canterbury
        --He is dead now, poor soul!--
        He sat at his door and stitched in the sun,
        Nodding and smiling at everyone;
        For St. Hugh makes all good cobblers merry,
        And often he sang as the pilgrims passed,
        "I can hammer a soldier's boot,
        And daintily glove a dainty foot.
        Many a sandal from my hand
        Has walked the road to Holy Land.
        Knights may fight for me, priests may pray for me,
        Pilgrims walk the pilgrim's way for me,
        I have a work in the world to do!
        --_Trowl the bowl, the nut-brown bowl,
              To good St. Hugh!_--
        The cobbler must stick to his last."

        And anon he would cry
        "Kit! Kit! Kit!" to his little son,
        "Look at the pilgrims riding by!
        Dance down, hop down, after them, run!"
        Then, like an unfledged linnet, out
        Would tumble the brave little lad,
        With a piping shout,--
        "O, look at them, look at them, look at them, Dad!
        Priest and prioress, abbot and friar,
        Soldier and seaman, knight and squire!
        How many countries have they seen?
        Is there a king there, is there a queen
        Dad, one day,
        Thou and I must ride like this,
        All along the Pilgrim's Way,
        By Glastonbury and Samarcand,
        El Dorado and Cathay,
        London and Persepolis,
        All the way to Holy Land!"

          Then, shaking his head as if he knew,
        Under the sign of the _Golden Shoe_,
        Touched by the glow of the setting sun,
        While the pilgrims passed,
        The little cobbler would laugh and say:
        "When you are old you will understand
        'Tis a very long way
        To Samarcand!
        Why, largely to exaggerate
        Befits not men of small estate,
        But--I should say, yes, I should say,
        'Tis a hundred miles from where you stand;
        And a hundred more, my little son,
        A hundred more, to Holy Land!...
        I have a work in the world to do
        --_Trowl the bowl, the nut-brown bowl,
                      To good St. Hugh!_--
        The cobbler must stick to his last."

    "Which last," said Nash, breaking his rhyme off short,
    "The crowder, after his kind, would seem to approve.
    Well--all the waves from that great wreck out there
    Break, and are lost in one withdrawing sigh:

        The little lad that used to play
          Around the cobbler's door,
        Kit Marlowe, Kit Marlowe,
          We shall not see him more.

    But--could I tell you how that galleon sank,
    Could I but bring you to that hollow whirl,
    The black gulf in mid-ocean, where that wreck
    Went thundering down, and round it hell still roars,
    That were a tale to snap all fiddle-strings."
    "Tell me," said Chapman.

                             "Ah, you wondered why,"
    Said Nash, "you wondered why he asked your help
    To crown that work of his. Why, Chapman, think,
    Think of the cobbler's awl--there's a stout lance
    To couch at London, there's a conquering point
    To carry in triumph through Persepolis!
    I tell you Kit was nothing but a child,
    When some rich patron of the _Golden Shoe_
    Beheld him riding into Samarcand
    Upon a broken chair, the which he said
    Was a white steed, splashed with the blood of kings.
      When, on that patron's bounty, he did ride
    So far as Cambridge, he was a brave lad,
    Untamed, adventurous, but still innocent,
    O, innocent as the cobbler's little self!
    He brought to London just a bundle and stick,
    A slender purse, an Ovid, a few scraps
    Of song, and all unshielded, all unarmed
    A child's heart, packed with splendid hopes and dreams.
    I say a child's heart, Chapman, and that phrase
    Crowns, not dis-crowns, his manhood.
                                    Well--he turned
    An honest penny, taking some small part
    In plays at the _Red Bull_. And, all the while,
    Beyond the paint and tinsel of the stage,
    Beyond the greasy cock-pit with its reek
    Of orange-peel and civet, as all of these
    Were but the clay churned by the glorious rush
    Of his white chariots and his burning steeds,
    Nay, as the clay were a shadow, his great dreams,
    Like bannered legions on some proud crusade,
    Empurpling all the deserts of the world,
    Swept on in triumph to the glittering towers
    Of his abiding City.
                        Then--he met
    That damned blood-sucking cockatrice, the pug
    Of some fine strutting mummer, one of those plagues
    Bred by our stage, a puff-ball on the hill
    Of Helicon. As for his wench--she too
    Had played so many parts that she forgot
    The cue for truth. King Puff had taught her well.
    He was the vainer and more foolish thing,
    She the more poisonous.
                              One dark day, to spite
    Archer, her latest paramour, a friend
    And apple-squire to Puff, she set her eyes
    On Marlowe ... feigned a joy in his young art,
    Murmured his songs, used all her London tricks
    To coney-catch the country greenhorn. Man,
    Kit never even _saw_ her painted face!
    He pored on books by candle-light and saw
    Everything thro' a mist. O, I could laugh
    To think of it, only--his up-turned skull
    There, in the dark, now that the flesh drops off,
    Has laughed enough, a horrible silent laugh,
    To think his Angel of Light was, after all,
    Only the red-lipped Angel of the Plague.
    He was no better than the rest of us,
    No worse. He felt the heat. He felt the cold.
    He took her down to Deptford to escape
    Contagion, and the crashing of sextons' spades
    On dead men's bones in every churchyard round;
    The jangling bell and the cry, _Bring out your dead_.
    And there she told him of her luckless life,
    Wedded, deserted, both against her will,
    A luckless Eve that never knew the snake.
    True and half-true she mixed in one wild lie,
    And then--she caught him by the hand and wept.
    No death-cart passed to warn him with its bell.
    Her eyes, her perfumed hair, and her red mouth,
    Her warm white breast, her civet-scented skin,
    Swimming before him, in a piteous mist,
    Made the lad drunk, and--she was in his arms;
    And all that God had meant to wake one day
    Under the Sun of Love, suddenly woke
    By candle-light and cried, 'The Sun; The Sun!'
    And he believed it, Chapman, he believed it!
    He was a cobbler's son, and he believed
    In Love! Blind, through that mist, he caught at Love,
    The everlasting King of all this world.

    Kit was not clever. Clever men--like Pomp--
    Might jest. And fools might laugh. But when a man,
    Simple as all great elemental things,
    Makes his whole heart a sacrificial fire
    To one whose love is in her supple skin,
    There comes a laughter in which jests break up
    Like icebergs in a sea of burning marl.
    Then dreamers turn to murderers in an hour.
    Then topless towers are burnt, and the Ocean-sea
    Tramples the proud fleet, down, into the dark,
    And sweeps over it, laughing. Come and see,
    The heart now of this darkness--no more waves,
    But the black central hollow where that wreck
    Went down for ever.
                          How should Piers Penniless
    Brand that wild picture on the world's black heart?--
    Last night I tried the way of the Florentine,
    And bruised myself; but we are friends together
    Mourning a dead friend, none will ever know!--
    Kit, do you smile at poor Piers Penniless,
    Measuring it out? Ah, boy, it is my best!
    Since hearts must beat, let it be _terza rima_,
    A ladder of rhyme that two sad friends alone
    May let down, thus, to the last circle of hell."

    So saying, and motionless as a man in trance,
    Nash breathed the words that raised the veil anew,
    Strange intervolving words which, as he spake them,
    Moved like the huge slow whirlpool of that pit
    Where the wreck sank, the serpentine slow folds
    Of the lewd Kraken that sucked it, shuddering, down:--

    This is the Deptford Inn. Climb the dark stair.
      Come, come and see Kit Marlowe lying dead!
    See, on the table, by that broken chair,

    The little phials of paint--the white and red.
      A cut-lawn kerchief hangs behind the door,
    Left by his punk, even as the tapster said.

    There is the gold-fringed taffeta gown she wore,
      And, on that wine-stained bed, as is most meet,
    He lies alone, never to waken more.

    O, still as chiselled marble, the frayed sheet
      Folds the still form on that sepulchral bed,
    Hides the dead face, and peaks the rigid feet.

    Come, come and see Kit Marlowe lying dead!
      Draw back the sheet, ah, tenderly lay bare
    The splendour of that Apollonian head;

    The gloriole of his flame-coloured hair;
      The lean athletic body, deftly planned
    To carry that swift soul of fire and air;

    The long thin flanks, the broad breast, and the grand
      Heroic shoulders! Look, what lost dreams lie
    Cold in the fingers of that delicate hand;

    And, shut within those lyric lips, what cry
      Of unborn beauty, sunk in utter night,
    Lost worlds of song, sealed in an unknown sky,

    Never to be brought forth, clothed on with light.
      Was this, then, this the secret of his song?--
    _Who ever loved that loved not at first?_

    It was not Love, not Love, that wrought this wrong;
      And yet--what evil shadow of this dark town
    Could quench a soul so flame-like clean and strong,

    Strike the young glory of his manhood down,
      Dead, like a dog, dead in a drunken brawl,
    Dead for a phial of paint, a taffeta gown?

    What if his blood were hot?   High over all
      He heard, as in his song the world still hears,
    Those angels on the burning heavenly wall

    Who chant the thunder-music of the spheres.
      Yet--through the glory of his own young dream
    Here did he meet that face, wet with strange tears,

    Andromeda, with piteous face astream,
      Hailing him, Perseus. In her treacherous eyes
    As in dark pools the mirrored stars will gleam,

    Here did he see his own eternal skies;
      And here--she laughed, nor found the dream amiss;
    But bade him pluck and eat--in Paradise.

    Here did she hold him, broken up with bliss,
      Here, like a supple snake, around him coiled,
    Here did she pluck his heart out with a kiss,

    Here were the wings clipped and the glory soiled,
      Here adders coupled in the pure white shrine,
    Here was the Wine spilt, and the Shew-bread spoiled.

    Black was that feast, though he who poured the Wine
      Dreamed that he poured it in high sacrament.
    Deep in her eyes he saw his own eyes shine,

    Beheld Love's god-head and was well content.
      Subtly her hand struck the pure silver note,
    The throbbing chord of passion that God meant

    To swell the bliss of heaven. Round his young throat
      She wound her swarthy tresses; then, with eyes
    Half mad to see their power, half mad to gloat,

    Half mad to batten on their own devilries,
      And mark what heaven-born splendours they could quell,
    She held him quivering in a mesh of lies,

    And in soft broken speech began to tell--
      There as, against her heart, throbbing he lay--
    The truth that hurled his soul from heaven to hell.

    Quivering, she watched the subtle whip-lash flay
      The white flesh of the dreams of his pure youth;
    Then sucked the blood and left them cold as clay.

    Luxuriously she lashed him with the truth.
      Against his mouth her subtle mouth she set
    To show, as through a mask, O, without ruth,

    As through a cold clay mask (brackish and wet
      With what strange tears!) it was not his, not his,
    The kiss that through his quivering lips she met.

    Kissing him, "_Thus_," she whispered, "_did he kiss.
      Ah, is the sweetness like a sword, then, sweet?
    Last night--ah, kiss again--aching with bliss,_

    _Thus was I made his own, from head to feet._"
      --A sudden agony thro' his body swept
    Tempestuously.--"_Our wedded pulses beat_

    _Like this and this; and then, at dawn, he slept._"
      She laughed, pouting her lips against his cheek
    To drink; and, as in answer, Marlowe wept.

    As a dead man in dreams, he heard her speak.
      Clasped in the bitter grave of that sweet clay,
    Wedded and one with it, he moaned. Too weak

    Even to lift his head, sobbing, he lay,
      Then, slowly, as their breathings rose and fell,
    He felt the storm of passion, far away,

    Gather. The shuddering waves began to swell.
      And, through the menace of the thunder-roll,
    The thin quick lightnings, thrilling through his hell,

    Lightnings that hell itself could not control
      (Even while she strove to bow his neck anew)
    Woke the great slumbering legions of his soul.

    Sharp was that severance of the false and true,
      Sharp as a sword drawn from a shuddering wound.
    But they, that were one flesh, were cloven in two.

    Flesh leapt from clasping flesh, without a sound.
      He plucked his body from her white embrace,
    And cast him down, and grovelled on the ground.

    Yet, ere he went, he strove once more to trace,
      Deep in her eyes, the loveliness he knew;
    Then--spat his hatred into her smiling face.

    She clung to him. He flung her off. He drew
      His dagger, thumbed the blade, and laughed--"Poor punk!
    What? Would you make me your own murderer, too?"

       *   *   *   *

      "That was the day of our great feast," said Nash,
    "Aboard the _Golden Hynde_. The grand old hulk
    Was drawn up for the citizens' wonderment
    At Deptford. Ay, Piers Penniless was there!
    Soaked and besotted as I was, I saw
    Everything. On her poop the minstrels played,
    And round her sea-worn keel, like meadow-sweet
    Curtseying round a lightning-blackened oak,
    Prentices and their sweethearts, heel and toe,
    Danced the brave English dances, clean and fresh
    As May.
            But in her broad gun-guarded waist
    Once red with British blood, long tables groaned
    For revellers not so worthy. Where her guns
    Had raked the seas, barrels of ale were sprung,
    Bestrid by roaring tipplers. Where at night
    The storm-beat crew silently bowed their heads
    With Drake before the King of Life and Death,
    A strumpet wrestled with a mountebank
    For pence, a loose-limbed Lais with a clown
    Of Cherry Hilton. Leering at their lewd twists,
    Cross-legged upon the deck, sluggish with sack,
    Like a squat toad sat Puff ...
    Propped up against the bulwarks, at his side,
    Archer, his apple-squire, hiccoughed a bawdy song.
    Suddenly, through that orgy, with wild eyes,
    Yet with her customary smile, O, there
    I saw in daylight what Kit Marlowe saw
    Through blinding mists, the face of his first love.
    She stood before her paramour on the deck,
    Cocking her painted head to right and left,
    Her white teeth smiling, but her voice a hiss:
    'Quickly,' she said to Archer, 'come away,
    Or there'll be blood spilt!'
                                 'Better blood than wine,'
    Said Archer, struggling to his feet, 'but who,
    Who would spill blood?'
                             'Marlowe!' she said.
                                                 Then Puff
    Reeled to his feet. 'What, Kit, the cobbler's son?
    The lad that broke his leg at the _Red Bull_,
    Tamburlaine-Marlowe, he that would chain kings
    To's chariot-wheel? What, is he rushing hither?
    He would spill blood for Gloriana, hey?
    O, my Belphoebe, you will crack my sides!
    Was this the wench that shipped a thousand squires?
    O, ho! But here he comes. Now, solemnly, lads,--
    _Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven
    To entertain divine Zenocrate!_'
    And there stood Kit, high on the storm-scarred poop,
    Against the sky, bare-headed. I saw his face,
    Pale, innocent, just the dear face of that boy
    Who walked to Cambridge with a bundle and stick,--
    The little cobbler's son. Yet--there I caught
    My only glimpse of how the sun-god looked,
    And only for one moment.
                                   When he saw
    His mistress, his face whitened, and he shook.
    Down to the deck he came, a poor weak man;
    And yet--by God--the only man that day
    In all our drunken crew.
                                  'Come along, Kit,'
    Cried Puff, 'we'll all be friends now, all take hands,
    And dance--ha! ha!--the shaking of the sheets!'
    Then Archer, shuffling a step, raised his cracked voice
    In Kit's own song to a falsetto tune,
    Snapping one hand, thus, over his head as he danced:--

              '_Come, live with me, and be my love,
              And we will all the pleasures prove!_' ...

    Puff reeled between, laughing. 'Damn you,' cried Kit,
    And, catching the fat swine by his round soft throat,
    Hurled him headlong, crashing across the tables,
    To lie and groan in the red bilge of wine
    That washed the scuppers.
                              Kit gave him not one glance.
    'Archer,' he said in a whisper.
                                    Instantly
    A long thin rapier flashed in Archer's hand.
    The ship was one wild uproar. Women screamed
    And huddled together. A drunken clamorous ring
    Seethed around Marlowe and his enemy.
    Kit drew his dagger, slowly, and I knew
    Blood would be spilt.
                          'Here, take my rapier, Kit!'
    I cried across the crowd, seeing the lad
    Was armed so slightly. But he did not hear.
    I could not reach him.
                            All at once he leapt
    Like a wounded tiger, past the rapier point
    Straight at his enemy's throat. I saw his hand
    Up-raised to strike! I heard a harlot's scream,
    And, in mid-air, the hand stayed, quivering, white,
    A frozen menace.
                      I saw a yellow claw
    Twisting the dagger out of that frozen hand;
    I saw his own steel in that yellow grip,
    His own lost lightning raised to strike at him!
    I saw it flash! I heard the driving grunt
    Of him that struck! Then, with a shout, the crowd
    Sundered, and through the gap, a blank red thing
    Streaming with blood came the blind face of Kit,
    Reeling, to me! And I, poor drunken I,
    Held my arms wide for him. Here, on my breast,
    With one great sob, he burst his heart and died."

       *   *   *   *

    Nash ceased. And, far away down Friday Street,
    The crowder with his fiddler wailed again:

      "_Blaspheming Tambolin must die
        And Faustus meet his end.
      Repent, repent, or presentlie
        To hell ye must descend._"

    And, as in answer, Chapman slowly breathed
    Those mightiest lines of Marlowe's own despair:

      "_Think'st thou that I who saw the face of God,
      And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
      Am not tormented with ten thousand hells?_"

    "Ah, you have said it," said Nash, "and there you know
    Why Kit desired your hand to crown his work.
    He reverenced you as one whose temperate eyes
    Austere and grave, could look him through and through;
    One whose firm hand could grasp the reins of law
    And guide those furious horses of the sun,
    As Ben and Will can guide them, where you will.
    His were, perchance, the noblest steeds of all,
    And from their nostrils blew a fierier dawn
    Above the world. That glory is his own;
    But where he fell, he fell. Before his hand
    Had learned to quell them, he was dashed to the earth.
    'Tis yours to show that good men honoured him.
    For, mark this, Chapman, since Kit Marlowe fell.
    There will be fools that, in the name of Art,
    Will wallow in the mire, crying 'I fall,
    I fall from heaven!'--fools that have only heard
    From earth, the rumour of those golden hooves
    Far, far above them. Yes, you know the kind,
    The fools that scorn Will for his lack of fire
    Because he quells the storms they never knew,
    And rides above the thunder; fools of Art
    That skip and vex, like little vicious fleas,
    Their only Helicon, some green madam's breast.
    Art! Art! O, God, that I could send my soul,
    In one last wave, from that night-hidden wreck,
    Across the shores of all the years to be;
    O, God, that like a crowder I might shake
    Their blind dark casements with the pity of it,
    Piers Penniless his ballad, a poor scrap,
    That but for lack of time, and hope and pence,
    He might have bettered! For a dead man's sake,
    Thus would the wave break, thus the crowder cry:--

      Dead, like a dog upon the road;
        Dead, for a harlot's kiss;
      The Apollonian throat and brow,
      The lyric lips, so silent now,
      The flaming wings that heaven bestowed
        For loftier airs than this!

      The sun-like eyes whose light and life
        Had gazed an angel's down,
      That burning heart of honey and fire,
      Quenched and dead for an apple-squire,
      Quenched at the thrust of a mummer's knife,
        Dead--for a taffeta gown!

      The wine that God had set apart,
        The noblest wine of all,
      Wine of the grapes that angels trod,
      The vintage of the glory of God,
      The crimson wine of that rich heart,
        Spilt in a drunken brawl,

      Poured out to make a steaming bath
        That night in the Devil's Inn,
      A steaming bath of living wine
      Poured out for Circe and her swine,
      A bath of blood for a harlot
        To supple and sleek her skin.

      And many a fool that finds it sweet
        Through all the years to be,
      Crowning a lie with Marlowe's fame,
      Will ape the sin, will ape the shame,
      Will ape our captain in defeat;
        But--not in victory;

      Till Art become a leaping-house,
        And Death be crowned as Life,
      And one wild jest outshine the soul
      Of Truth ... O, fool, is this your goal?
      You are not our Kit Marlowe,
        But the drunkard with the knife;

      Not Marlowe, but the Jack-o'-Lent
        That lured him o'er the fen!
      O, ay, the tavern is in its place,
      And the punk's painted smiling face,
      But where is our Kit Marlowe
        The man, the king of men?

      Passion? You kiss the painted mouth,
        The hand that clipped his wings,
      The hand that into his heart she thrust
      And tuned him to her whimpering lust,
      And played upon his quivering youth
        As a crowder plucks the strings.

      But he who dared the thunder-roll,
        Whose eagle-wings could soar,
      Buffeting down the clouds of night,
      To beat against the Light of Light,
      That great God-blinded eagle-soul,
        We shall not see him, more."


V

THE COMPANION OF A MILE

THWACK! _Thwack_! One early dawn upon our door I heard the bladder of
some motley fool Bouncing, and all the dusk of London shook With bells!
I leapt from bed,--had I forgotten?--I flung my casement wide and craned
my neck Over the painted Mermaid. There he stood, His right leg yellow
and his left leg blue, With jingling cap, a sheep-bell at his tail,
Wielding his eel-skin bladder,--_bang! thwack! bang!_--Catching a
comrade's head with the recoil And skipping away! All Bread Street dimly
burned Like a reflected sky, green, red and white With littered
branches, ferns and hawthorn-clouds; For, round Sir Fool, a frolic
morrice-troop Of players, poets, prentices, mad-cap queans, Robins and
Marians, coloured like the dawn, And sparkling like the greenwood whence
they came With their fresh boughs all dewy from the dark, Clamoured,
_Come down! Come down, and let us in!_ High over these, I suddenly saw
Sir Fool Leap to a sign-board, swing to a conduit-head, And perch there,
gorgeous on the morning sky, Tossing his crimson cockscomb to the blue
And crowing like Chanticleer, _Give them a rouse! Tickle it, tabourer!
Nimbly, lasses, nimbly! Tuck up your russet petticoats and dance! Let
the Cheape know it is the first of May!_

And as I seized shirt, doublet and trunk-hose, I saw the hobby-horse
come cantering down, A pasteboard steed, dappled a rosy white Like
peach-bloom, bridled with purple, bitted with gold, A crimson foot-cloth
on his royal flanks, And, riding him, His Majesty of the May! Round him
the whole crowd frolicked with a shout, And as I stumbled down the
crooked stair I heard them break into a dance and sing:--


SONG

    I

      Into the woods we'll trip and go,
      Up and down and to and fro,
      Under the moon to fetch in May,
      And two by two till break of day,
              A-maying,
              A-playing,
      For Love knows no gain-saying!
      Wisdom trips not? Even so--
      Come, young lovers, trip and go,
              Trip and go.


    II

      Out of the woods we'll dance and sing
      Under the morning-star of Spring,
      Into the town with our fresh boughs
      And knock at every sleeping house,
              Not sighing,
              Or crying,
      Though Love knows no denying!
      Then, round your summer queen and king,
      Come, young lovers, dance and sing,
              Dance and sing!

    "_Chorus_," the great Fool tossed his gorgeous crest,
    And lustily crew against the deepening dawn,
    "_Chorus_," till all the Cheape caught the refrain,
    And, with a double thunder of frolic feet,
    Its ancient nut-brown tabors woke the Strand:--

            A-maying,
            A-playing,
    For Love knows no gain-saying!
    Wisdom trips not? Even so,--
    Come, young lovers, trip and go,
            Trip and go.

    Into the Mermaid with a shout they rushed
    As I shot back the bolts, and _bang, thwack, bang,_
    The bladder bounced about me. What cared I?
    This was all England's holy-day! "Come in,
    My yellow-hammers," roared the Friar Tuck
    Of this mad morrice, "come you into church,
    My nightingales, my scraps of Lincoln green,
    And hear my sermon!" On a window-seat
    He stood, against the diamonded rich panes
    In the old oak parlour and, throwing back his hood,
    Who should it be but Ben, rare Ben himself?
    The wild troup laughed around him, some a-sprawl
    On tables, kicking parti-coloured heels,
    Some with their Marians jigging on their knees,
    And, in the front of all, the motley fool
    Cross-legged upon the rushes.
                                  O, I knew him,--
    Will Kemp, the player, who danced from London town
    To Norwich in nine days and was proclaimed
    Freeman of Marchaunt Venturers and hedge-king
    Of English morrice-dancery for ever!
    His nine-days' wonder, through the countryside
    Was hawked by every ballad-monger. Kemp
    Raged at their shake-rag Muses. None but I
    Guessed ever for what reason, since he chose
    His anticks for himself and, in his games,
    Was more than most May-fools fantastical.
    I watched his thin face, as he rocked and crooned,
    Shaking the squirrels' tails around his ears;
    And, out of all the players I had seen,
    His face was quickest through its clay to flash
    The passing mood. Though not a muscle stirred,
    The very skin of it seemed to flicker and gleam
    With little summer lightnings of the soul
    At every fleeting fancy. For a man
    So quick to bleed at a pin-prick or to leap
    Laughing through hell to save a butterfly,
    This world was difficult; and perchance he found
    In his fantastic games that open road
    Which even Will Shakespeare only found at last
    In motley and with some wild straws in his hair.
    But "Drawer! drawer!" bellowed Friar Ben,
    "Make ready a righteous breakfast while I preach;--
    Tankards of nut-brown ale, and cold roast beef,
    Cracknels, old cheese, flaunes, tarts and clotted cream.
    Hath any a wish not circumscribed by these?"

    "A white-pot custard, for my white-pot queen,"
    Cried Kemp, waving his bauble, "mark this, boy,
    A white-pot custard for my queen of May,--
    She is not here, but that concerns not thee!--
    A white-pot Mermaid custard, with a crust,
    Lashings of cream, eggs, apple-pulse and spice,
    A little sugar and manchet bread. Away!
    Be swift!"
                    And as I bustled to and fro,
    The Friar raised his big brown fists again
    And preached in mockery of the Puritans
    Who thought to strip the moonshine wings from Mab,
    Tear down the May-poles, rout our English games,
    And drive all beauty back into the sea.

    Then laughter and chatter and clashing tankards drowned
    All but their May-day jollity a-while.
    But, as their breakfast ended, and I sank
    Gasping upon a bench, there came still more
    Poets and players crowding into the room;
    And one--I only knew him as Sir John--
    Waved a great ballad at Will Kemp and laughed,
    "Atonement, Will, atonement!"
                            "What," groaned Kemp,
    "Another penny poet? How many lies
    Does _this_ rogue tell? Sir, I have suffered much
    From these Melpomenes and strawberry quills,
    And think them better at their bloody lines
    On _The Blue Lady_. Sir, they set to work
    At seven o'clock in the morning, the same hour
    That I, myself, that's _Cavaliero_ Kemp,
    With heels of feather and heart of cork, began
    Frolickly footing, from the great Lord Mayor
    Of London, tow'rds the worshipful Master Mayor
    Of Norwich."
                    "Nay, Kemp, this is a May-day tune,
    A morrice of country rhymes, made by a poet
    Who thought it shame so worthy an act as thine
    Should wither in oblivion if the Muse
    With her Castalian showers could keep it green.
    And while the fool nid-nodded all in time,
    Sir John, in swinging measure, trolled this tale:--


    I

    With Georgie Sprat, my overseer, and Thomas Slye, my tabourer,
      And William Bee, my courier, when dawn emblazed the skies,
    I met a tall young butcher as I danced by little Sudbury,
      Head-master o' morrice-dancers all, high headborough of hyes.

    By Sudbury, by Sudbury, by little red-roofed Sudbury,
      He wished to dance a mile with me! I made a courtly bow:
    I fitted him with morrice-bells, with treble, bass and tenor bells,
      And "_Tickle your tabor, Tom_," I cried, "_we're going to market now_."

    And rollicking down the lanes we dashed, and frolicking up the hills
        we clashed,
      And like a sail behind me flapped his great white frock a-while,
    Till, with a gasp, he sank and swore that he could dance with me no more;
      And--over the hedge a milk-maid laughed, _Not dance with him a mile_?

    "You lout!" she laughed, "I'll leave my pail, and dance with him for
        cakes and ale!
      I'll dance a mile for love," she laughed, "and win my wager, too.
    Your feet are shod and mine are bare; but when could leather dance on air?
      A milk-maid's feet can fall as fair and light as falling dew."

    I fitted her with morrice-bells, with treble, bass and tenor bells:
      The fore-bells, as I linked them at her throat, how soft they sang!
    Green linnets in a golden nest, they chirped and trembled on her breast,
      And, faint as elfin blue-bells, at her nut-brown ankles rang.

    I fitted her with morrice-bells that sweetened into woodbine bells,
      And trembled as I hung them there and crowned her sunny brow:
    "Strike up," she laughed, "my summer king!" And all her bells began to ring,
      And "_Tickle your tabor, Tom_," I cried, "_we're going to Sherwood now_!"

    When cocks were crowing, and light was growing, and horns were blowing,
        and milk-pails flowing,
      We swam thro' waves of emerald gloom along a chestnut aisle,
    Then, up a shining hawthorn-lane, we sailed into the sun again,
      Will Kemp and his companion, his companion of a mile.

    "Truer than most," snarled Kemp, "but mostly lies!
    And why does he forget the miry lanes
    By Brainford with thick woods on either side,
    And the deep holes, where I could find no ease
    But skipped up to my waist?" A crackling laugh
    Broke from his lips which, if he had not worn
    The cap and bells, would scarce have roused the mirth
    Of good Sir John, who roundly echoed it,
    Then waved his hand and said, "Nay, but he treats
    Your morrice in the spirit of Lucian, Will,
    Who thought that dancing was no mushroom growth,
    But sprung from the beginning of the world
    When Love persuaded earth, air, water, fire,
    And all the jarring elements to move
    In measure. Right to the heart of it, my lad,
    The song goes, though the skin mislike you so."
    "Nay, an there's more of it, I'll sing it, too!
    'Tis a fine tale, Sir John, I have it by heart,
    Although 'tis lies throughout." Up leapt Will Kemp,
    And crouched and swayed, and swung his bauble round,
    Making the measure as they trolled the tale,
    Chanting alternately, each answering each.


    II

    _The Fool_

    The tabor fainted far behind us, but her feet that day
      They beat a rosier morrice o'er the fairy-circled green.

    _Sir John_

    And o'er a field of buttercups, a field of lambs and buttercups,
      We danced along a cloth of gold, a summer king and queen!

    _The Fool_

    And straying we went, and swaying we went, with lambkins round us
        playing we went;
      Her face uplift to drink the sun, and not for me her smile,
    We danced, a king and queen of May, upon a fleeting holy-day,
      But O, she'd won her wager, my companion of a mile!

    _Sir John_

    Her rosy lips they never spoke, though every rosy foot-fall broke
      The dust, the dust to Eden-bloom; and, past the throbbing blue,
    All ordered to her rhythmic feet, the stars were dancing with my sweet,
      And all the world a morrice-dance!

    _The Fool_

                                         She knew not; but I knew!
    Love like Amphion with his lyre, made all the elements conspire
      To build His world of music. All in rhythmic rank and file,
    I saw them in their cosmic dance, catch hands across, retire, advance,
      For me and my companion, my companion of a mile!

    _Sir John_

    The little leaves on every tree, the rivers winding to the sea,
      The swinging tides, the wheeling winds, the rolling heavens above,
    Around the May-pole Igdrasil, they worked the Morrice-master's will,
      Persuaded into measure by the all-creative Love.

    That hour I saw, from depth to height, this wildering universe unite!
      The lambs of God around us and His passion in every flower!

    _The Fool_

    His grandeur in the dust, His dust a blaze of blinding majesty,
      And all His immortality in one poor mortal hour.

    And Death was but a change of key in Life the golden melody,
      And Time became Eternity, and Heaven a fleeting smile;
    For all was each and each was all, and all a wedded unity,
      Her heart in mine, and mine in my companion of a mile.

    _Thwack_! _Thwack_! He whirled his bauble round about,
      "This fellow beats them all," he cried, "the worst
    Those others wrote was that I hopped from York
    To Paris with a mortar on my head.
    This fellow sends me leaping through the clouds
    To buss the moon! The best is yet to come;
    Strike up, Sir John! Ha! ha! You know no more?"
    Kemp leapt upon a table. "Clear the way",
    He cried, and with a great stamp of his foot
    And a wild crackling laugh, drew all to hark,
              "With hey and ho, through thick and thin,
               The hobby-horse is forgotten,
             But I must finish what I begin,
               Tho' all the roads be rotten.

     "By all those twenty thousand chariots, Ben,
    Hear this true tale they shall! Now, let me see,
    Where was Will Kemp? Bussing the moon's pale mouth?
    Ah, yes!" He crouched above the listening throng,--
    "_Good as a play_," I heard one whispering quean,--
    And, waving his bauble, shuffling with his feet
    In a dance that marked the time, he sank his voice
    As if to breathe great secrets, and so sang:--


    III

    At Melford town, at Melford town, at little grey-roofed Melford town,
      A long mile from Sudbury, upon the village green,
    We danced into a merry rout of country-folk that skipt about
      A hobby-horse, a May-pole, and a laughing white-pot queen.

    They thronged about us as we stayed, and there I gave my sunshine maid
      An English crown for cakes and ale--her dancing was so true!
    And "Nay," she said, "I danced my mile for love!" I answered with a smile,
      "'Tis but a silver token, lass, 'thou'st won that wager, too."

    I took my leash of morrice-bells, my treble, bass and tenor bells,
      They pealed like distant marriage-bells! And up came William Bee
    With Georgie Sprat, my overseer, and Thomas Slye, my tabourer,
      "Farewell," she laughed, and vanished with a Suffolk courtesie.
    I leapt away to Rockland, and from Rockland on to Hingham,
      From Hingham on to Norwich, sirs! I hardly heard a-while
    The throngs that followed after, with their shouting and their laughter,
      For a shadow danced beside me, my companion of a mile!

    At Norwich, by St. Giles his gate, I entered, and the Mayor in state,
      With all the rosy knights and squires for twenty miles about,
    With trumpets and with minstrelsy, was waiting there to welcome me;
      And, as I skipt into the street, the City raised a shout.

    They gave me what I did not seek. I fed on roasted swans a week!
      They pledged me in their malmsey, and they lined me warm with ale!
    They sleeked my skin with red-deer pies, and all that runs and
        swims and flies;
      But, through the clashing wine-cups, O, I heard her clanking pail.

    And, rising from his crimson chair, the worshipful and portly Mayor
      Bequeathed me forty shillings every year that I should live,
    With five good angels in my hand that I might drink while I could stand!
      They gave me golden angels! What I lacked they could not give.

    They made Will Kemp, thenceforward, sirs, Freeman of Marchaunt Venturers!
      They hoped that I would dance again from Norwich up to York;
    Then they asked me, all together, had I met with right May weather,
      And they praised my heels of feather, and my heart, my heart of cork.

       *   *   *   *

    As I came home by Sudbury, by little red-roofed Sudbury,
      I waited for my bare-foot maid, among her satin kine!
    I heard a peal of wedding-bells, of treble, bass and tenor bells:
      "Ring well," I cried, "this bridal morn! You soon shall ring for mine!"

    I found her foot-prints in the grass, just where she stood and saw me pass.
      I stood within her own sweet field and waited for my may.
    I laughed. The dance has turned about! I stand within: she'll pass without,
      And--_down the road the wedding came, the road I danced that day_!

    _I saw the wedding-folk go by, with laughter and with minstrelsy,
      I gazed across her own sweet hedge, I caught her happy smile,
    I saw the tall young butcher pass to little red-roofed Sudbury,
      His bride upon his arm, my lost companion of a mile._

        Down from his table leapt the motley Fool.
        His bladder bounced from head to ducking head,
        His crackling laugh rang high,--"Sir John, I danced
        In February, and the song says May!
        A fig for all your poets, liars all!
        Away to Fenchurch Street, lasses and lads,
        They hold high revel there this May-day morn.
        Away!" The mad-cap throng echoed the cry.
        He drove them with his bauble through the door;
        Then, as the last gay kerchief fluttered out
        He gave one little sharp sad lingering cry
        As of a lute-string breaking. He turned back

    And threw himself along a low dark bench;
    His jingling cap was crumpled in his fist,
    And, as he lay there, all along Cheapside
    The happy voices of his comrades rang:--

          Out of the woods we'll dance and sing
          Under the morning-star of Spring,
          Into the town with our fresh boughs
          And knock at every sleeping house,
                Not sighing,
                Or crying,
          Though Love knows no denying!
          Then, round your summer queen and king,
          Come, young lovers, dance and sing,
                Dance and sing!

    His motley shoulders heaved. I touched his arm,
    "What ails you, sir?" He raised his thin white face,
    Wet with the May-dew still. A few stray petals
    Clung in his tangled hair. He leapt to his feet,
    "'Twas February, but I danced, boy, danced
    In May! Can you do this?" Forward he bent
    Over his feet, and shuffled it, heel and toe,
    Out of the Mermaid, singing his old song--

                  A-maying,
                  A-playing,
          For Love knows no gain-saying!
          Wisdom trips not? Even so,--
          Come, young lovers, trip and go,
                  Trip and go.

    Five minutes later, over the roaring Strand,
    "_Chorus!_" I heard him crow, and half the town
    Reeled into music under his crimson comb.


VI

BIG BEN

    Gods, what a hubbub shook our cobwebs out
    The day that Chapman, Marston and our Ben
    Waited in Newgate for the hangman's hands.

    Chapman and Marston had been flung there first
    For some imagined insult to the Scots
    In _Eastward Ho_, the play they wrote with Ben.
    But Ben was famous now, and our brave law
    Would fain have winked and passed the big man by.
    The lesser men had straightway been condemned
    To have their ears cut off, their noses slit.
    With other tortures.

                          Ben had risen at that!
    He gripped his cudgel, called for a quart of ale,
    Then like Helvellyn with his rocky face
    And mountain-belly, he surged along Cheapside,
    Snorting with wrath, and rolled into the gaol,
    To share the punishment.

                              "There is my mark!
    'Tis not the first time you have branded me,"
    Said our big Ben, and thrust his broad left thumb
    Branded with T for Tyburn, into the face
    Of every protest. "That's the mark you gave me
    Because I killed my man in Spitalfields,
    A duel honest as any your courtiers fight.
    But I was no Fitzdotterel, bore no gules
    And azure, robbed no silk-worms for my hose,
    I was Ben Jonson, out of Annandale,
    Bricklayer in common to the good Lord God.
    You branded me. I am Ben Jonson still.
    You cannot rub it out."

                              The Mermaid Inn
    Buzzed like a hornet's nest, upon the day
    Fixed for their mutilation. And the stings
    Were ready, too; for rapiers flashed and clashed
    Among the tankards. Dekker was there, and Nash,
    Brome (Jonson's body-servant, whom he taught
    His art of verse and, more than that, to love him,)
    And half a dozen more. They planned to meet
    The prisoners going to Tyburn, and attempt
    A desperate rescue.

                        All at once we heard
    A great gay song come marching down the street,
    A single voice, and twenty marching men,
    Then the full chorus, twenty voices strong:--

    The prentice whistles at break of day
      All under fair roofs and towers,
    When the old Cheape openeth every way
      Her little sweet inns like flowers;
    And he sings like a lark, both early and late,
      To think, if his house take fire,
    At the good _Green Dragon_ in Bishopsgate
      He may drink to his heart's desire.

    _Chorus:_ Or sit at his ease in the old _Cross Keys_
      And drink to his heart's desire.

    But I, as I walk by _Red Rose Lane_,
      Tho' it warmeth my heart to see
    _The Swan_, _The Golden Hynde_, and _The Crane_,
      With the door set wide for me;
    Tho' Signs like daffodils paint the strand
      When the thirsty bees begin,
    Of all the good taverns in Engeland
      My choice is--_The Mermaid Inn_.

    _Chorus:_ There is much to be said for _The Saracen's Head_,
      But my choice is _The Mermaid Inn_.

    Into the tavern they rushed, these roaring boys.
    "Now broach your ripest and your best," they cried.
      "All's well! They are all released! They are on the way!
    Old Camden and young Selden worked the trick.
    Where is Dame Dimpling? Where's our jolly hostess?
    Tell her the Mermaid Tavern will have guests:
    We are sent to warn her. She must raid Cook's Row,
    And make their ovens roar. Nobody dines
    This day with old Duke Humphrey. Red-deer pies,
    Castles of almond crust, a shield of brawn
    Big as the nether millstone, barrels of wine,
    Three roasted peacocks! Ben is on the way!"
    Then all the rafters rang with song again:--

          There was a Prince--long since, long since!--
            To East Cheape did resort,
          For that he loved _The Blue Boar's Head_
            Far better than Crown or Court;

          But old King Harry in Westminster
            Hung up, for all to see,
          Three bells of power in St. Stephen's Tower,
            Yea, bells of a thousand and three,

    _Chorus:_ Three bells of power in a timber tower,
      Thirty thousand and three,

          For Harry the Fourth was a godly king
            And loved great godly bells!
          He bade them ring and he bade them swing
            Till a man might hear nought else.
          In every tavern it soured the sack
            With discord and with din;
          But they drowned it all in a madrigal
            Like this, at _The Mermaid Inn_.

    _Chorus:_ They drowned it all in a madrigal
            Like this, at _The Mermaid Inn._

      "But how did Selden work it?"--"Nobody knows.
    They will be here anon. Better ask Will.
    He's the magician!"--"Ah, here comes Dame Dimpling!"
    And, into the rollicking chaos our good Dame
    --A Dame of only two and thirty springs--
    All lavender and roses and white kerchief,
    Bustled, to lay the tables.

                                Fletcher flung
    His arm around her waist and kissed her cheek.
    But all she said was, "_One--two--three--four--five--
    Six at a pinch, in yonder window-seat._"
    "A health to our Dame Dimpling," Beaumont cried,
    And Dekker, leaping on the old black settle,
    Led all their tumult into a song again:--

    What is the Mermaid's merriest toast?
      Our hostess--good Dame Dimpling!
    Who is it rules the Mermaid roast?
    Who is it bangs the Mermaid host,
    Tho' her hands be soft as her heart almost?
                Dame Dimpling!

    She stands at the board in her fresh blue gown
      With the sleeves tucked up--Dame Dimpling!
    She rolls the white dough up and down
    And her pies are crisp, and her eyes are brown.
    So--she is the Queen of all this town,--
                Dame Dimpling!

    Her sheets are white as black-thorn bloom,
      White as her neck, Dame Dimpling!
    Her lavender sprigs in the London gloom
    Make every little bridal-room
    A country nook of fresh perfume,--
                Dame Dimpling!

    She wears white lace on her dark brown hair:
      And a rose on her breast, Dame Dimpling!
    And who can show you a foot as fair
    Or an ankle as neat when she climbs the stair,
    Taper in hand, and head in the air,
    And a rose in her cheek?--O, past compare,
                Dame Dimpling!

    "But don't forget those oyster-pies," cried Lyly.
    "Nor the roast beef," roared Dekker. "Prove yourself
    The Muse of meat and drink."

                                  There was a shout
    In Bread Street, and our windows all swung wide,
    Six heads at each.

                        Nat Field bestrode our sign
    And kissed the painted Mermaid on her lips,
    Then waved his tankard.

                            "Here they come," he cried.
    "Camden and Selden, Chapman and Marston, too,
    And half Will's company with our big Ben
    Riding upon their shoulders."

                                  "Look!" cried Dekker,
    "But where is Atlas now? O, let them have it!
    A thumping chorus, lads! Let the roof crack!"
    And all the Mermaid clashed and banged again
    In thunderous measure to the marching tune
    That rolled down Bread Street, forty voices strong:--

          At _Ypres Inn_, by _Wring-wren Lane_,
            Old John of Gaunt would dine:
          He scarce had opened an oyster or twain,
            Or drunk one flagon of wine,
          When, all along the Vintry Ward,
            He heard the trumpets blow,
          And a voice that roared--"If thou love thy lord,
            Tell John of Gaunt to go!"

    _Chorus:_ A great voice roared--"If thou love thy lord,
            Tell John of Gaunt to go!"

          Then into the room rushed Haviland
            That fair fat Flemish host,
          "They are marching hither with sword and brand,
            Ten thousand men--almost!
          It is these oysters or thy sweet life,
            Thy blood or the best of the bin!"--
          "Proud Pump, avaunt!" quoth John of Gaunt,
            "I will dine at _The Mermaid Inn!_"

    _Chorus:_ "Proud Pump, avaunt!" quoth John of Gaunt,
            "There is wine at _The Mermaid Inn!_"

    And in came Ben like a great galleon poised
    High on the white crest of a shouting wave,
    And then the feast began. The fragrant steam
    As from the kitchens of Olympus drew
    A throng of ragged urchins to our doors.
    Ben ordered them a castellated pie
    That rolled a cloud around them where they sat
    Munching upon the cobblestones. Our casements
    Dripped with the golden dews of Helicon;
    And, under the warm feast our cellarage
    Gurgled and foamed in the delicious cool
    With crimson freshets--
                            "Tell us," cried Nat Field,
    When pipes began to puff. "How did you work it?"
    Camden chuckled and tugged his long white beard.
    "Out of the mouth of babes," he said and shook
    His head at Selden! "O, young man, young man,
    There's a career before you! Selden did it.
    Take my advice, my children. Make young Selden
    Solicitor-general to the Mermaid Inn.
    That rosy silken smile of his conceals
    A scholar! Yes, that suckling lawyer there
    Puts my grey beard to shame. His courteous airs
    And silken manners hide the nimblest wit
    That ever trimmed a sail to catch the wind
    Of courtly favour. Mark my words now, Ben,
    That youth will sail right up against the wind
    By skilful tacking. But you run it fine,
    Selden, you run it fine. Take my advice
    And don't be too ironical, my boy,
    Or even the King will see it."
                                    He chuckled again.
    "But tell them of your tractate!"
                                      "Here it is,"
    Quoth Selden, twisting a lighted paper spill,
    Then, with his round cherubic face aglow
    Lit his long silver pipe,
                              "Why, first," he said,
    "Camden being Clarencieux King-at-arms,
    He read the King this little tract I wrote
    Against tobacco." And the Mermaid roared
    With laughter. "Well, you went the way to hang
    All three of them," cried Lyly, "and, as for Ben,
    His Trinidado goes to bed with him."
    "Green gosling, quack no more," Selden replied,
    Smiling that rosy silken smile anew.
    "The King's a _critic_! When have critics known
    The poet from his creatures, God from me?
    How many cite Polonius to their sons
    And call it Shakespeare? Well, I took my text
    From sundry creatures of our great big Ben,
    And called it 'Jonson.'
                            Camden read it out
    Without the flicker of an eye. His beard
    Saved us, I think. The King admired his text.
    '_There is a man_,' he read, '_lies at death's door
    Thro' taking of tobacco. Yesterday
    He voided a bushel of soot_.'
                                  'God bless my soul,
    A bushel of soot! Think of it!' said the King.
    'The man who wrote those great and splendid words,'
    Camden replied,--I had prepared his case
    Carefully--'lies in Newgate prison, sire.
    His nose and ears await the hangman's knife.'

    'Ah,' said the shrewd King, goggling his great eyes
    Cannily. 'Did he not defame the Scots?'
    'That's true,' said Camden, like a man that hears
    Truth for the first time. 'O ay, he defamed 'em,'
    The King said, very wisely, once again.
    'Ah, but,' says Camden, like a man that strives
    With more than mortal wit, 'only such Scots
    As flout your majesty, and take tobacco.
    He is a Scot, himself, and hath the gift
    Of preaching.' Then we gave him Jonson's lines
    Against Virginia. '_Neither do thou lust
    After that tawny weed; for who can tell,
    Before the gathering and the making up,
    What alligarta may have spawned thereon_,'
    Or words to that effect.
                              'Magneeficent!'
    Spluttered the King--'who knows? Who knows, indeed?
    That's a grand touch, that Alligarta, Camden!'
    'The Scot who wrote those great and splendid words,'
    Said Camden, 'languishes in Newgate, sire.
    His ears and nose--'
                          And there, as we arranged
    With Inigo Jones, the ladies of the court
    Assailed the King in tears. Their masque and ball
    Would all be ruined. All their Grecian robes,
    Procured at vast expense, were wasted now.
    The masque was not half-written. Master Jones
    Had lost his poets. They were all in gaol.
    Their noses and their ears ...
                                    'God bless my soul,'
    Spluttered the King, goggling his eyes again,
    'What d'you make of it, Camden?'--
                                        'I should say
    A Puritan plot, sire; for these justices--
    Who love tobacco--use their law, it seems,
    To flout your Majesty at every turn.
    If this continue, sire, there'll not be left
    A loyal ear or nose in all your realm.'
    At that, our noble monarch well-nigh swooned.
    He hunched his body, padded as it was
    Against the assassin's knife, six inches deep
    With great green quilts, wagged his enormous head,
    Then, in a dozen words, he wooed destruction:
    'It is presumption and a high contempt
    In subjects to dispute what kings can do,'
    He whimpered. 'Even as it is blasphemy
    To thwart the will of God.'
                                He waved his hand,
    And rose. 'These men must be released, at once!'
    Then, as I think, to seek a safer place,
    He waddled from the room, his rickety legs
    Doubling beneath that great green feather-bed
    He calls his 'person.'--I shall dream to-night
    Of spiders, Camden.--But in half an hour,
    Inigo Jones was armed with Right Divine
    To save such ears and noses as the ball
    Required for its perfection. Think of that!
    And let this earthly ball remember, too,
    That Chapman, Marston, and our great big Ben
    Owe their poor adjuncts to--ten Grecian robes
    And 'Jonson' on tobacco! England loves
    Her poets, O, supremely, when they're dead."
    "But Ben has narrowly escaped her love,"
    Said Chapman gravely.
                          "What do you mean?" said Lodge.
    And, as he spoke, there was a sudden hush.
    A tall gaunt woman with great burning eyes,
    And white hair blown back softly from a face
    Ethereally fierce, as might have looked
    Cassandra in old age, stood at the door.
    "Where is my Ben?" she said.
                                  "Mother!" cried Ben.
    He rose and caught her in his mighty arms.
    Her labour-reddened, long-boned hands entwined
    Behind his neck.
                      "She brought this to the gaol,"
    Said Chapman quietly, tossing a phial across
    To Camden. "And he meant to take it, too,
    Before the hangman touched him. Half an hour
    And you'd have been too late to save big Ben.
    He has lived too much in ancient Rome to love
    A slit nose and the pillory. He'd have wrapped
    His purple round him like an emperor.
    I think she had another for herself."
    "There's Roman blood in both of them," said Dekker,
    "Don't look. She is weeping now," And, while Ben held
    That gaunt old body sobbing against his heart,
    Dekker, to make her think they paid no heed,
    Began to sing; and very softly now.
    Full forty voices echoed the refrain:--

          _The Cardinal's Hat_ is a very good inn,
            And so is _The Puritan's Head_;
          But I know a sign of a Wine, a Wine
            That is better when all is said.
          It is whiter than Venus, redder than Mars,
            It was old when the world begun;
          For all good inns are moons or stars
            But _The Mermaid_ is their Sun.

    _Chorus:_ They are all alight like moons in the night,
            But _The Mermaid_ is their Sun.

          Therefore, when priest or parson cries
            That inns like flowers increase,
          I say that mine inn is a church likewise,
            And I say to them "Be at peace!"
          An host may gather in dark St. Paul's
            To salve their souls from sin;
          But the Light may be where "two or three"
            Drink Wine in _The Mermaid Inn_.

    _Chorus:_ The Light may be where "two or three"
            Drink Wine in _The Mermaid Inn_.


VII

THE BURIAL OF A QUEEN

    'Twas on an All Souls' Eve that our good Inn
    --Whereof, for ten years now, myself was host--
    Heard and took part in its most eerie tale.
      It was a bitter night, and master Ben,
    --His hair now flecked with grey, though youth still fired
    His deep and ageless eyes,--in the old oak-chair,
    Over the roaring hearth, puffed at his pipe;
    A little sad, as often I found him now
    Remembering vanished faces. Yet the years
    Brought others round him. Wreaths of Heliochrise
    Gleamed still in that great tribe of Benjamin,
    Burned still across the malmsey and muscadel.
    Chapman and Browne, Herrick,--a name like thyme
    Crushed into sweetness by a bare-foot maid
    Milking, at dewy dawn, in Elfin-land,--
    These three came late, and sat in a little room
    Aside, supping together, on one great pie,
    Whereof both crust and coffin were prepared
    By master Herrick's receipt, and all washed down
    With mighty cups of sack. This left with Ben,
    John Ford, wrapped in his cloak, brooding aloof,
    Drayton and Lodge and Drummond of Hawthornden.
      Suddenly, in the porch, I heard a sound
    Of iron that grated on the flags. A spade
    And pick came edging through the door.

                                            "O, room!
    Room for the master-craftsman," muttered Ford,
    And grey old sexton Scarlet hobbled in.
      He shuffled off the snow that clogged his boots,
    --On my clean rushes!--brushed it from his cloak
    Of Northern Russet, wiped his rheumatic knees,
    Blew out his lanthorn, hung it on a nail,
    Leaned his rude pick and spade against the wall,
    Flung back his rough frieze hood, flapped his gaunt arms,
    And called for ale.

                        "Come to the fire," said Lodge.
    "Room for the wisest counsellor of kings,
    The kindly sage that puts us all to bed,
    And tucks us up beneath the grass-green quilt."
      "Plenty of work, eh Timothy?" said Ben.
    "Work? Where's my liquor? O, ay, there's work to spare,"
    Old Scarlet croaked, then quaffed his creaming stoup,
    While Ben said softly--"Pity you could not spare,
    You and your Scythe-man, some of the golden lads
    That I have seen here in the Mermaid Inn!"
    Then, with a quiet smile he shook his head
    And turned to master Drummond of Hawthornden.
    "Well, songs are good; but flesh and blood are better.
    The grey old tomb of Horace glows for me
    Across the centuries, with one little fire
    Lit by a girl's light hand." Then, under breath,
    Yet with some passion, he murmured this brief rhyme:--

    I

    _Dulce ridentem_, laughing through the ages,
      _Dulce loquentem_, O, fairer far to me,
    Rarer than the wisdom of all his golden pages
      Floats the happy laughter of his vanished Lalage.

    II

    _Dulce loquentem_,--we hear it and we know it.
      _Dulce ridentem_,--so musical and low.
    "Mightier than marble is my song!" Ah, did the poet
      Know why little Lalage was mightier even so?

    III

    _Dulce ridentem_,--through all the years that sever,
      Clear as o'er yon hawthorn hedge we heard her passing by,--
    _Lalagen amabo_,--a song may live for ever
      _Dulce loquentem_,--but Lalage must die.

    "I'd like to learn that rhyme," the sexton said.
    "I've a fine memory too. You start me now,
    I'd keep it up all night with ancient ballads."
      And then--a strange thing happened. I saw John Ford
    "With folded arms and melancholy hat"
    (As in our Mermaid jest he still would sit)
    Watching old Scarlet like a man in trance.
    The sexton gulped his ale and smacked his lips,
    Then croaked again--"O, ay, there's work to spare,
    We fills 'em faster than the spades can dig,"
    And, all at once, the lights burned low and blue.
    Ford leaned right forward, with his grim black eyes
    Widening.

              "Why, that's a marvellous ring!" he said,
    And pointed to the sexton's gnarled old hand
    Spread on the black oak-table like the claw
    Of some great bird of prey. "A ruby worth
    The ransom of a queen!" The fire leapt up!
    The sexton stared at him;
    Then stretched his hand out, with its blue-black nails,
    Full in the light, a grim earth-coloured hand,
    But bare as it was born.

                              "There was a ring!
    I could have sworn it! Red as blood!" cried Ford.
    And Ben and Lodge and Drummond of Hawthornden
    All stared at him. For such a silent soul
    Was master Ford that, when he suddenly spake,
    It struck the rest as dumb as if the Sphinx
    Had opened its cold stone lips. He would sit mute
    Brooding, aloof, for hours, his cloak around him,
    A staff between his knees, as if prepared
    For a long journey, a lonely pilgrimage
    To some dark tomb; a strange and sorrowful soul,
    Yet not--as many thought him--harsh or hard,
    But of a most kind patience. Though he wrote
    In blood, they say, the blood came from his heart;
    And all the sufferings of this world he took
    To his own soul, and bade them pasture there:
    Till out of his compassion, he became
    A monument of bitterness. He rebelled;
    And so fell short of that celestial height
    Whereto the greatest only climb, who stand
    By Shakespeare, and accept the Eternal Law.
    These find, in law, firm footing for the soul,
    The strength that binds the stars, and reins the sea,
    The base of being, the pillars of the world,
    The pledge of honour, the pure cord of love,
    The form of truth, the golden floors of heaven.
    These men discern a height beyond all heights,
    A depth below all depths, and never an end
    Without a pang beyond it, and a hope;
    Without a heaven beyond it, and a hell.
    For these, despair is like a bubble pricked,
    An old romance to make young lovers weep.
    For these, the law becomes a fiery road,
    A Jacob's ladder through that vast abyss
    Lacking no rung from realm to loftier realm,
    Nor wanting one degree from dust to wings.
    These, at the last, radiant with victory,
    Lay their strong hands upon the wingèd steeds
    And fiery chariots, and exult to hold,
    Themselves, the throbbing reins, whereby they steer
    The stormy splendours.
                           He, being less, rebelled,
    Cried out for unreined steeds, and unruled stars,
    An unprohibited ocean and a truth
    Untrue; and the equal thunder of the law
    Hurled him to night and chaos, who was born
    To shine upon the forehead of the day.
    And yet--the voice of darkness and despair
    May speak for heaven where heaven would not be heard,
    May fight for heaven where heaven would not prevail,
    And the consummate splendour of that strife,
    Swallowing up all discords, all defeat,
    In one huge victory, harmonising all,
    Make Lucifer, at last, at one with God.

      There,--on that All Souls' Eve, you might have thought
    A dead man spoke, to see how Drayton stared,
    And Drummond started.
                          "You saw no ruby ring,"
    The old sexton muttered sullenly. "If you did,
    The worse for me, by all accounts. The lights
    Burned low. You caught the firelight on my fist.
    What was it like, this ring?"
                                  "A band of gold,
    And a great ruby, heart-shaped, fit to burn
    Between the breasts of Laïs. Am I awake
    Or dreaming?"
                  "Well,--that makes the second time!
    There's many have said they saw it, out of jest,
    To scare me. For the astrologer did say
    The third time I should die. Now, did you see it?
    Most likely someone's told you that old tale!
    You hadn't heard it, now?"
                               Ford shook his head.
    "What tale?" said Ben.
                           "O, you could make a book
    About my life. I've talked with quick and dead,
    And neither ghost nor flesh can fright me now!
    I wish it was a ring, so's I could catch him,
    And sell him; but I've never seen him yet.
    A white witch told me, if I did, I'd go
    Clink, just like that, to heaven or t'other place,
    Whirled in a fiery chariot with ten steeds
    The way Elijah went. For I have seen
    So many mighty things that I must die
    Mightily.
              Well,--I came, sirs, to my craft
    The day mine uncle Robert dug the grave
    For good Queen Katharine, she whose heart was broke
    By old King Harry, a very great while ago.
    Maybe you've heard about my uncle, sirs?
    He was far-famous for his grave-digging.
    In depth, in speed, in neatness, he'd no match!
    They've put a fine slab to his memory
    In Peterborough Cathedral--_Robert Scarlet,
    Sexton for half a century_, it says,
    _In Peterborough Cathedral, where he built
    The last sad habitation for two queens,
    And many hundreds of the common sort.
    And now himself, who for so many built
    Eternal habitations, others have buried._
    _Obiit anno ætatis, ninety-eight,
    July the second, fifteen ninety-four._
      We should do well, sir, with a slab like that,
    Shouldn't we?" And the sexton leered at Lodge.
    "Not many boasts a finer slab than that.
    There's many a king done worse. Ah, well, you see,
    He'd a fine record. Living to ninety-eight,
    He buried generations of the poor,
    A countless host, and thought no more of it
    Than digging potatoes. He'd a lofty mind
    That found no satisfaction in small deeds.
    But from his burying of two queens he drew
    A lively pleasure. Could he have buried a third,
    It would indeed have crowned his old white hairs.
    But he was famous, and he thought, perchance,
    A third were mere vain-glory. So he died.
    I helped him with the second."
                                   The old man leered
    To see the shaft go home.
                              Ben filled the stoup
    With ale. "So that," quoth he, "began the tale
    About this ruby ring?" "But who," said Lodge,
    "Who was the second queen?"
                                "A famous queen,
    And a great lover! When you hear her name,
    Your hearts will leap. Her beauty passed the bounds
    Of modesty, men say, yet--she died young!
    We buried her at midnight. There were few
    That knew it; for the high State Funeral
    Was held upon the morrow, Lammas morn.
    Anon you shall hear why. A strange thing that,--
    To see the mourners weeping round a hearse
    That held a dummy coffin. Stranger still
    To see us lowering the true coffin down
    By torchlight, with some few of her true friends,
    In Peterborough Cathedral, all alone."
      "Old as the world," said Ford. "It is the way
    Of princes. Their true tears and smiles are seen
    At dead of night, like ghosts raised from the grave!
    And all the luxury of their brief, bright noon,
    Cloaks but a dummy throne, a mask of life;
    And, at the last, drapes a false catafalque,
    Holding a vacant urn, a mask of death.
    But tell, tell on!"
                        The sexton took a draught
    Of ale and smacked his lips.
                                 "Mine uncle lived
    A mile or more from Peterborough, then.
    And, past his cottage, in the dead of night,
    Her royal coach came creeping through the lanes,
    With scutcheons round it and no crowd to see,
    And heralds carrying torches in their hands,
    And none to admire, but him and me, and one,
    A pedlar-poet, who lodged with us that week
    And paid his lodging with a bunch of rhymes.
    By these, he said, my uncle Robert's fame
    Should live, as in a picture, till the crack
    Of doom. My uncle thought that he should pay
    Four-pence beside; but, when the man declared
    The thought unworthy of these august events,
    My uncle was abashed.
                          And, truth to tell,
    The rhymes were mellow, though here and there he swerved
    From truth to make them so. Nor would he change
    'June' to 'July' for all that we could say.
    'I never said the month was June,' he cried,
    'And if I did, Shakespeare hath jumped an age!
    Gods, will you hedge me round with thirty nights?
    "June" rhymes with "moon"!' With that, he flung them down
    And strode away like Lucifer, and was gone,
    Before old Scarlet could approach again
    The matter of that four-pence.
                                   Yet his rhymes
    Have caught the very colours of that night!
    I can see through them,
    Ay, just as through our cottage window-panes,
    Can see the great black coach,
    Carrying the dead queen past our garden-gate.
    The roses bobbing and fluttering to and fro,
    Hide, and yet show the more by hiding, half.
    And, like smoked glass through which you see the sun,
    The song shows truest when it blurs the truth.
    This is the way it goes."
                              He rose to his feet,
    Picked up his spade, and struck an attitude,
    Leaning upon it. "I've got to feel my spade,
    Or I'll forget it. This is the way I speak it.
    Always." And, with a schoolboy's rigid face,
    And eyes fixed on the rafters, he began,
    Sing-song, the pedlar-poet's bunch of rhymes:--

    As I went by the cattle-shed
      The grey dew dimmed the grass,
    And, under a twisted apple-tree,
    Old Robin Scarlet stood by me.
    "Keep watch! Keep watch to-night," he said,
      "There's things 'ull come to pass.

    "Keep watch until the moon has cleared
      The thatch of yonder rick;
    Then I'll come out of my cottage-door
    To wait for the coach of a queen once more;
    And--you'll say nothing of what you've heard,
      But rise and follow me quick."

    "And what 'ull I see if I keep your trust,
      And wait and watch so late?"
    "Pride," he said, "and Pomp," he said,
    "Beauty to haunt you till you're dead,
    And Glorious Dust that goes to dust,
      Passing the white farm-gate.

    "You are young and all for adventure, lad,
      And the great tales to be told:
    This night, before the clock strike one,
    Your lordliest hour will all be done;
    But you'll remember it and be glad,
      In the days when you are old!"

    All in the middle of the night,
      My face was at the pane;
    When, creeping out of his cottage-door,
    To wait for the coach of a queen once more,
    Old Scarlet, in the moon-light,
      Beckoned to me again.

    He stood beneath a lilac-spray,
      Like Father Time for dole,
    In Reading Tawny cloak and hood,
    With mattock and with spade he stood,
    And, far away to southward,
      A bell began to toll.

    He stood beneath a lilac-spray,
      And never a word he said;
    But, as I stole out of the house,
    He pointed over the orchard boughs,
    Where, not with dawn or sunset,
      The Northern sky grew red.

    I followed him, and half in fear,
      To the old farm-gate again;
    And, round the curve of the long white road,
    I saw that the dew-dashed hedges glowed
    Red with the grandeur drawing near,
      And the torches of her train.

    They carried her down with singing,
      With singing sweet and low,
    Slowly round the curve they came,
    Twenty torches dropping flame,
    The heralds that were bringing her
      The way we all must go.

    'Twas master William Dethick,
      The Garter King of Arms,
    Before her royal coach did ride,
    With none to see his Coat of Pride,
    For peace was on the countryside,
      And sleep upon the farms;

    Peace upon the red farm,
      Peace upon the grey,
    Peace on the heavy orchard trees,
    And little white-walled cottages,
    Peace upon the wayside,
      And sleep upon the way.

    So master William Dethick,
      With forty horse and men,
    Like any common man and mean
    Rode on before the Queen, the Queen,
    And--only a wandering pedlar
      Could tell the tale again.

    How, like a cloud of darkness,
      Between the torches moved
    Four black steeds and a velvet pall
    Crowned with the Crown Imperiall
    And--on her shield--the lilies,
      The lilies that she loved.

    Ah, stained and ever stainless
      Ah, white as her own hand,
    White as the wonder of that brow,
    Crowned with colder lilies now,
    White on the velvet darkness,
      The lilies of her land!

    The witch from over the water,
      The fay from over the foam,
    The bride that rode thro' Edinbro' town
    With satin shoes and a silken gown,
    A queen, and a great king's daughter,--
      Thus they carried her home,

    With torches and with scutcheons,
      Unhonoured and unseen,
    With the lilies of France in the wind a-stir,
    And the Lion of Scotland over her,
    Darkly, in the dead of night,
      They carried the Queen, the Queen.

    The sexton paused and took a draught of ale.
    "'Twas there," he said, "I joined 'em at the gate,
    My uncle and the pedlar. What they sang,
    The little shadowy throng of men that walked
    Behind the scutcheoned coach with bare bent heads
    I know not; but 'twas very soft and low.
    They walked behind the rest, like shadows flung
    Behind the torch-light, from that strange dark hearse.
    And, some said, afterwards, they were the ghosts
    Of lovers that this queen had brought to death.
    A foolish thought it seemed to me, and yet
    Like the night-wind they sang. And there was one
    An olive-coloured man,--the pedlar said
    Was like a certain foreigner that she loved,
    One Chastelard, a wild French poet of hers.
    Also the pedlar thought they sang 'farewell'
    In words like this, and that the words in French
    Were written by the hapless Queen herself,
    When as a girl she left the vines of France
    For Scotland and the halls of Holyrood:--

    I

            Though thy hands have plied their trade
              Eighty years without a rest,
            Robin Scarlet, never thy spade
              Built a house for such a guest!
            Carry her where, in earliest June,
              All the whitest hawthorns blow;
            Carry her under the midnight moon,
              Singing very soft and low.
    Slow between the low green larches, carry the lovely lady sleeping,
      Past the low white moon-lit farms, along the lilac-shadowed way!
    Carry her through the summer darkness, weeping, weeping, weeping, weeping!
      Answering only, to any that ask you, whence ye carry her,--_Fotheringhay!_

    II

            She was gayer than a child!
            --_Let your torches droop for sorrow._--
            Laughter in her eyes ran wild!
            --_Carry her down to Peterboro'._--
            Words were kisses in her mouth!
            --_Let no word of blame be spoken._--
            She was Queen of all the South!
            --_In the North, her heart was broken._--
    They should have left her in her vineyards, left her heart to her
        land's own keeping,
      Left her white breast room to breathe, and left her light foot free
          to dance.
    Out of the cold grey Northern mists, we carry her weeping,
        weeping, weeping,--
                  _O, ma patrie,
                  La plus chérie,
            Adieu, plaisant pays de France!_


    III

            Many a red heart died to beat
            --_Music swelled in Holyrood!_--
            Once, beneath her fair white feet.
            --_Now the floors may rot with blood_--
            She was young and her deep hair--
            --_Wind and rain were all her fate!_--
            Trapped young Love as in a snare,
            --_And the wind's a sword in the Canongate!
                          Edinboro'!
                          Edinboro'!
    Music built the towers of Troy, but thy grey walls are built of sorrow!_
    Wind-swept hills, and sorrowful glens, of thrifty sowing and iron reaping,
      What if her foot were fair as a sunbeam, how should it touch or
          melt your snows?
            What if her hair were a silken mesh?
            Hands of steel can deal hard blows,
            Iron breast-plates bruise fair flesh!
            Carry her southward, palled in purple,
            Weeping, weeping, weeping, weeping,
    What had their rocks to do with roses? Body and soul she was all one rose.

    Thus, through the summer night, slowly they went,
    We three behind,--the pedlar-poet and I,
    And Robin Scarlet. The moving flare that ringed
    The escutcheoned hearse, lit every leaf distinct
    Along the hedges and woke the sleeping birds,
    But drew no watchers from the drowsier farms.
    Thus, through a world of innocence and sleep,
    We brought her to the doors of her last home,
    In Peterborough Cathedral. Round her tomb
    They stood, in the huge gloom of those old aisles,
    The heralds with their torches, but their light
    Struggled in vain with that tremendous dark.
    Their ring of smoky red could only show
    A few sad faces round the purple pall,
    The wings of a stone angel overhead,
    The base of three great pillars, and, fitfully,
    Faint as the phosphorus glowing in some old vault,
    One little slab of marble, far away.
      Yet, or the darkness, or the pedlar's words
    Had made me fanciful, I thought I saw
    Bowed shadows praying in those unplumbed aisles,
    Nay, dimly heard them weeping, in a grief
    That still was built of silence, like the drip
    Of water from a frozen fountain-head.
      We laid her in her grave. We closed the tomb.
    With echoing footsteps all the funeral went;
    And I went last to close and lock the doors;
    Last, and half frightened of the enormous gloom
    That rolled along behind me as one by one
    The torches vanished. O, I was glad to see
    The moonlight on the kind turf-mounds again.
      But, as I turned the key, a quivering hand
    Was laid upon my arm. I turned and saw
    That foreigner with the olive-coloured face.
      From head to foot he shivered, as with cold.
    He drew me into the shadows of the porch.
    'Come back with me,' he whispered, and slid his hand
    --Like ice it was!--along my wrist, and slipped
    A ring upon my finger, muttering quick,
    As in a burning fever, 'All the wealth
    Of Eldorado for one hour! Come back!
    I must go back and see her face again!
    I was not there, not there, the day she--died.
    You'll help me with the coffin. Not a soul
    Will know. Come back! One moment, only one!'
      I thought the man was mad, and plucked my hand
    Away from him. He caught me by the sleeve,
    And sank upon his knees, lifting his face
    Most piteously to mine. 'One moment! See!
    I loved her!'
    I saw the moonlight glisten on his tears,
    Great, long, slow tears they were; and then--my God--
    As his face lifted and his head sank back
    Beseeching me--I saw a crimson thread
    Circling his throat, as though the headsman's axe
    Had cloven it with one blow, so shrewd, so keen,
    The head had slipped not from the trunk.
                                             I gasped;
    And, as he pleaded, stretching his head back,
    The wound, O like a second awful mouth,
    The wound began to gape.
                             I tore my cloak
    Out of his clutch. My keys fell with a clash.
    I left them where they lay, and with a shout
    I dashed into the broad white empty road.
    There was no soul in sight. Sweating with fear
    I hastened home, not daring to look back;
    But as I turned the corner, I heard the clang
    Of those great doors, and knew he had entered in.

    Not till I saw before me in the lane
    The pedlar and my uncle did I halt
    And look at that which clasped my finger still
    As with a band of ice.
                           My hand was bare!
    I stared at it and rubbed it. Then I thought
    I had been dreaming. There had been no ring!
    The poor man I had left there in the porch,
    Being a Frenchman, talked a little wild;
    But only wished to look upon her grave.
    And I--I was the madman! So I said
    Nothing. But all the same, for all my thoughts,
    I'd not go back that night to find the keys,
    No, not for all the rubies in the crown
    Of Prester John.

       *   *   *   *

                     The high State Funeral
    Was held on Lammas Day. A wondrous sight
    For Peterborough! For myself, I found
    Small satisfaction in a catafalque
    That carried a dummy coffin. None the less,
    The pedlar thought that as a Solemn Masque,
    Or Piece of Purple Pomp, the thing was good,
    And worthy of a picture in his rhymes;
    The more because he said it shadowed forth
    The ironic face of Death.
                              The Masque, indeed
    Began before we buried her. For a host
    Of Mourners--Lords and Ladies--on Lammas eve
    Panting with eagerness of pride and place,
    Arrived in readiness for the morrow's pomp,
    And at the Bishop's Palace they found prepared
    A mighty supper for them, where they sat
    All at one table. In a Chamber hung
    With 'scutcheons and black cloth, they drank red wine
    And feasted, while the torches and the Queen
    Crept through the darkness of Northampton lanes.

    At seven o'clock on Lammas Morn they woke,
    After the Queen was buried; and at eight
    The Masque set forth, thus pictured in the rhymes
    With tolling bells, which on the pedlar's lips
    Had more than paid his lodging: Thus he spake it,
    Slowly, sounding the rhymes like solemn bells,
    And tolling, in between, with lingering tongue:--

    _Toll!_--From the Palace the Releevants creep,--
      A hundred poor old women, nigh their end,
    Wearing their black cloth gowns, and on each head
    An ell of snow-white holland which, some said,
                      Afterwards they might keep,
    --_Ah, Toll!_--with nine new shillings each to spend,
      For all the trouble that they had, and all
      The sorrow of walking to this funeral.

    _Toll!_--And the Mourning Cloaks in purple streamed
      Following, a long procession, two by two,
    Her Household first. With these, Monsieur du Preau
    Her French Confessor, unafraid to show
                      The golden Cross that gleamed
    About his neck, warned what the crowd might do
      Said _I will wear it, though I die for it!_
      So subtle in malice was that Jesuit.

    _Toll!_--Sir George Savile in his Mourner's Gown
      Carried the solemn Cross upon a Field
    Azure, and under it by a streamer borne
    Upon a field of Gules, an Unicorn
                      Argent and, lower down,
    A scrolled device upon a blazoned shield,
      Which seemed to say--I AM SILENT TILL THE END!--
      _Toll! Toll!_--IN MY DEFENCE, GOD ME DEFEND!

    _Toll!_--and a hundred poor old men went by,
      Followed by two great Bishops.--_Toll, ah toll!_--
    Then, with White Staves and Gowns, four noble lords;
    Then sixteen Scots and Frenchmen with drawn swords;
                      Then, with a Bannerol,
    Sir Andrew Noel, lifting to the sky
      The Great Red Lion. Then the Crown and Crest
      Borne by a Herald on his glittering breast.

    And now--ah now, indeed, the deep bell tolls--
      That empty Coffin, with its velvet pall,
    Borne by six Gentlemen, under a canopy
    Of purple, lifted by four knights, goes by.

                      The Crown Imperial
    Burns on the Coffin-head. Four Bannerols
      On either side, uplifted by four squires,
      Roll on the wind their rich heraldic fires.
    _Toll!_ The Chief Mourner--the fair Russell!--_toll!_--
      Countess of Bedford--_toll!_--they bring her now,
    Weeping under a purple Cloth of State,
    Till, halting there before the Minister Gate,
                      Having in her control
    The fair White Staves of office, with a bow
      She gives them to her two great Earls again,
      Then sweeps them onward in her mournful train.

    _Toll!_ At the high Cathedral door the Quires
      Meet them and lead them, singing all the while
    A mighty _Miserere_ for her soul!
    Then, as the rolling organ--_toll, ah toll!_--
                      Floods every glimmering aisle
    With ocean-thunders, all those knights and squires
      Bring the false Coffin to the central nave
      And set it in the Catafalque o'er her grave.

    The Catafalque was made in Field-bed wise
      Valanced with midnight purple, fringed with gold:
    All the Chief Mourners on dark thrones were set
    Within it, as jewels in some huge carcanet:
                      Above was this device
    IN MY DEFENCE, GOD ME DEFEND, inscrolled
      Round the rich Arms of Scotland, as to say
      "Man judged me. I abide the Judgment Day."

    The sexton paused anew. All looked at him,
    And at his wrinkled, grim, earth-coloured hand,
    As if, in that dim light, beclouded now
    With blue tobacco-smoke, they thought to see
    The smouldering ruby again.
                                "Ye know," he said,
    "How master William Wickham preached that day?"
    Ford nodded. "I have heard of it. He showed
    Subtly, O very subtly, after his kind,
    That the white Body of Beauty such as hers
    Was in itself Papistical, a feast,
    A fast, an incense, a burnt-offering,
    And an Abomination in the sight
    Of all true Protestants. Why, her very name
    Was Mary!"
               "Ay, that's true, that's very true!"
    The sexton mused. "Now that's a strange deep thought!
    The Bishop missed a text in missing that.
    Her name, indeed, was Mary!"
                                 "Did you find
    Your keys again?" "Ay, Sir, I found them!" "Where?"
    "Strange you should ask me that! After the throng
    Departed, and the Nobles were at feast,
    All in the Bishop's Palace--a great feast
    And worthy of their sorrow--I came back
    Carrying my uncle's second bunch of keys
    To lock the doors and search, too, for mine own.
    'Twas growing dusk already, and as I thrust
    The key into the lock, the great grey porch
    Grew cold upon me, like a tomb.
                                    I pushed
    Hard at the key--then stopped--with all my flesh
    Freezing, and half in mind to fly; for, sirs,
    The door was locked already, and--_from within_!
    I drew the key forth quietly and stepped back
    Into the Churchyard, where the graves were warm
    With sunset still, and the blunt carven stones
    Lengthened their homely shadows, out and out,
    To Everlasting. Then I plucked up heart,
    Seeing the footprints of that mighty Masque
    Along the pebbled path. A queer thought came
    Into my head that all the world without
    Was but a Masque, and I was creeping back,
    Back from the Mourner's Feast to Truth again.
    Yet--I grew bold, and tried the Southern door.
      'Twas locked, but held no key on the inner side
    To foil my own, and softly, softly, click,
    I turned it, and with heart, sirs, in my mouth,
    Pushed back the studded door and entered in ...
      Stepped straight out of the world, I might have said,
    Out of the dusk into a night so deep,
    So dark, I trembled like a child....
                                         And then
    I was aware, sirs, of a great sweet wave
    Of incense. All the gloom was heavy with it,
    As if her Papist Household had returned
    To pray for her poor soul; and, my fear went.
    But either that strange incense weighed me down,
    Or else from being sorely over-tasked,
    A languor came upon me, and sitting there
    To breathe a moment, in a velvet stall,
    I closed mine eyes.
                        A moment, and no more,
    For then I heard a rustling in the nave,
    And opened them; and, very far away,
    As if across the world, in Rome herself,
    I saw twelve tapers in the solemn East,
    And saw, or thought I saw, cowled figures kneel
    Before them, in an incense-cloud.
                                      And then,
    Maybe the sunset deepened in the world
    Of masques without--clear proof that I had closed
    Mine eyes but for a moment, sirs, I saw
    As if across a world-without-end tomb,
    A tiny jewelled glow of crimson panes
    Darkening and brightening with the West.
                                             And then,
    Then I saw something more--Queen Mary's vault,
    And--it was open!...
                         Then, I heard a voice,
    A strange deep broken voice, whispering love
    In soft French words, that clasped and clung like hands;
    And then--two shadows passed against the West,
    Two blurs of black against that crimson stain,
    Slowly, O very slowly, with bowed heads,
    Leaning together, and vanished into the dark
    Beyond the Catafalque.
                           Then--I heard him pray,--
    And knew him for the man that prayed to me,--
    Pray as a man prays for his love's last breath!
    And then, O sirs, it caught me by the throat,
    And I, too, dropped upon my knees and prayed;
    For, as in answer to his prayer, there came
    A moan of music, a mighty shuddering sound
    From the great organ, a sound that rose and fell
    Like seas in anger, very far away;
    And then a peal of thunder, and then it seemed,
    As if the graves were giving up their dead,
    A great cowled host of shadows rose and sang;--

                _Dies iræ, dies illâ
                Solvet sæclum in favilla,
                Teste David cum Sibylla._

    I heard her sad, sad, little, broken voice,
    Out in the darkness. 'Ay, and David, too,
    His blood is on the floors of Holyrood,
    To speak for me.' Then that great ocean-sound
    Swelled to a thunder again, and heaven and earth
    Shrivelled away; and in that huge slow hymn
    Chariots were driven forth in flaming rows,
    And terrible trumpets blown from deep to deep.

    And then, ah then, the heart of heaven was hushed,
    And--in the hush--it seemed an angel wept,
    Another Mary wept, and gathering up
    All our poor wounded, weary, way-worn world,
    Even as a Mother gathers up her babe,
    Soothed it against her breast, and rained her tears
    On the pierced feet of God, and melted Him
    To pity, and over His feet poured her deep hair.
    The music died away. The shadows knelt.
    And then--I heard a rustling nigh the tomb,
    And heard--and heard--or dreamed I heard--farewells,
    Farewells for everlasting, deep farewells,
    Bitter as blood, darker than any death.
    And, at the last, as in a kiss, one breath,
    One agony of sweetness, like a sword
    For sharpness, drawn along a soft white throat;
    And, for its terrible sweetness, like a sigh
    Across great waters, very far away,--
    _Sweetheart!_

    And then, like doors, like world-without-end doors
    That shut for Everlasting, came a clang,
    And ringing, echoing, through the echo of it,
    One terrible cry that plucked my heart-strings out,
    _Mary!_ And on the closed and silent tomb,
    Where there were two, one shuddering shadow lay,
    And then--I, too,--reeled, swooned and knew no more.

    Sirs, when I woke, there was a broad bright shaft
    Of moonlight, slanting through an Eastern pane
    Full on her tomb and that black Catafalque.
    And on the tomb there lay--my bunch of keys!
    I struggled to my feet,
    Ashamed of my wild fancies, like a man
    Awakening from a drunken dream. And yet,
    When I picked up the keys, although that storm
    Of terror had all blown by and left me calm,
    I lifted up mine eyes to see the scroll
    Round the rich crest of that dark canopy,
    IN MY DEFENCE, GOD ME DEFEND. The moon
    Struck full upon it; and, as I turned and went,
    God help me, sirs, though I were loyal enough
    To good Queen Bess, I could not help but say,
    _Amen!_
    And yet, methought it was not I that spake,
    But some deep soul that used me for a mask,
    A soul that rose up in this hollow shell
    Like dark sea-tides flooding an empty cave.
    I could not help but say with my poor lips,
    _Amen! Amen!_
                       Sirs, 'tis a terrible thing
    To move in great events. Since that strange night
    I have not been as other men. The tides
    Would rise in this dark cave"--he tapped his skull--
    "Deep tides, I know not whence; and when they rose
    My friends looked strangely upon me and stood aloof.
    And once, my uncle said to me--indeed,
    It troubled me strangely,--'Timothy,' he said,
    'Thou art translated! I could well believe
    Thou art two men, whereof the one's a fool,
    The other a prophet. Or else, beneath thy skin
    There lurks a changeling! What hath come to thee?'
    And then, sirs, then--well I remember it!
    'Twas on a summer eve, and we walked home
    Between high ghostly hedges white with may--
    And uncle Robin, in his holy-day suit
    Of Reading Tawny, felt his old heart swell
    With pride in his great memories. He began
    Chanting the pedlar's tune, keeping the time
    Thus, jingle, jingle, slowly, with his keys:--


    I

        Douglas, in the moonless night
          --_Muffled oars on blue Loch Leven!_--
        Took her hand, a flake of white
          --_Beauty slides the bolts of heaven._--
        Little white hand, like a flake of snow,
          When they saw it, his Highland crew
        Swung together and murmured low,
          "Douglas, wilt _thou_ die then, too?"
        And the pine trees whispered, weeping,
          "_Douglas, Douglas, tender and true!_
    Little white hand like a tender moonbeam, soon shall you set the
        broadswords leaping,
      It is the Queen, the Queen!" they whispered, watching her soar to
          the saddle anew.
    "There will be trumpets blown in the mountains, a mist of blood on the
        heather, and weeping,
      Weeping, weeping, and _thou_, too, dead for her, Douglas, Douglas,
          tender and true."


    II

            Carry the queenly lass along!
              --_Cold she lies, cold and dead,_--
            She whose laughter was a song,
              --_Lapped around with sheets of lead!_--
            She whose blood was wine of the South,
              --_Light her down to a couch of clay!_--
            And a royal rose her mouth,
              And her body made of may!
            --Lift your torches, weeping, weeping,
              Light her down to a couch of clay.
    They should have left her in her vineyards, left her heart to her
        land's own keeping,
      Left her white breast room to breathe, and left her light foot
          free to dance!

    Hush! Between the solemn pinewoods, carry the lovely lady sleeping,
      Out of the cold grey Northern mists, with banner and scutcheon,
          plume, and lance,
    Carry her southward, palled in purple, weeping, weeping, weeping, weeping,--
                    _O, ma patrie,
                    La plus chérie,
            Adieu, plaisant pays de France!_


    Well, sirs, that dark tide rose within my brain!
    I snatched his keys and flung them over the hedge,
    Then flung myself down on a bank of ferns
    And wept and wept and wept.
                                It puzzled him.
    Perchance he feared my mind was going and yet,
    O, sirs, if you consider it rightly now,
    With all those ages knocking at his doors,
    With all that custom clamouring for his care,
    Is it so strange a grave-digger should weep?
    Well--he was kind enough and heaped my plate
    That night at supper.
    But I could never dig my graves at ease
    In Peterborough Churchyard. So I came
    To London--to St. Mary Magdalen's.
    And thus, I chanced to drink my ale one night
    Here in the Mermaid Inn. 'Twas All Souls' Eve,
    And, on that bench, where master Ford now sits
    Was master Shakespeare--
    Well, the lights burned low,
    And just like master Ford to-night he leaned
    Suddenly forward. 'Timothy,' he said,
    'That's a most marvellous ruby!'
                                     My blood froze!
    I stretched my hand out bare as it was born;
    And he said nothing, only looked at me.
    Then, seeing my pipe was empty, he bade me fill
    And lit it for me.
                       Peach, the astrologer,
    Was living then; and that same night I went
    And told him all my trouble about this ring.
    He took my hand in his, and held it--thus--
    Then looked into my face and said this rhyme:--

            _The ruby ring, that only three
            While Time and Tide go by, shall see,
            Weds your hand to history._

            _Honour and pride the first shall lend;
            The second shall give you gold to spend;
            The third--shall warn you of your end._

    Peach was a rogue, some say, and yet he spake
    Most truly about the first," the sexton mused,
    "For master Shakespeare, though they say in youth
    Outside the theatres, he would hold your horse
    For pence, prospered at last, bought a fine house
    In Stratford, lived there like a squire, they say.
    And here, here he would sit, for all the world
    As he were but a poet! God bless us all,
    And then--to think!--he rose to be a squire!
    A deep one, masters! Well, he lit my pipe!"
    "Why did they bury such a queen by night?"
    Said Ford. "Kings might have wept for her. Did Death
    Play epicure and glutton that so few
    Were bidden to such a feast. Once on a time,
    I could have wept, myself, to hear a tale
    Of beauty buried in the dark. And hers
    Was loveliness, far, far beyond the common!
    Such beauty should be marble to the touch
    Of time, and clad in purple to amaze
    The moth. But she was kind and soft and fair,
    A woman, and so she died. But, why the dark?"

    "Sir, they gave out the coffin was too heavy
    For gentlemen to bear!"--"For kings to bear?"
    Ford flashed at him. The sexton shook his head,--
    "Nay! Gentlemen to bear! But--the true cause--
    Ah, sir, 'tis unbelievable, even to me,
    A sexton, for a queen so fair of face!
    And all her beds, even as the pedlar said,
    Breathing Arabia, sirs, her walls all hung
    With woven purple wonders and great tales
    Of amorous gods, and mighty mirrors, too,
    Imaging her own softness, night and dawn,
    When through her sumptuous hair she drew the combs;
    And like one great white rose-leaf half her breast
    Shone through it, firm as ivory."
                                      "Ay," said Lodge,
    Murmuring his own rich music under breath,
    "_About her neck did all the graces throng,
    And lay such baits as did entangle death._"
    "Well, sir, the weather being hot, they feared
    She would not hold the burying!"...
                                        "In some sort,"
    Ford answered slowly, "if your tale be true,
    She did not hold it. Many a knightly crest
    Will bend yet o'er the ghost of that small hand."

    There was a hush, broken by Ben at last,
    Who turned to Ford--"How now, my golden lad?
    The astrologer's dead hand is on thy purse!"

    Ford laughed, grimly, and flung an angel down.
    "Well, cause or consequence, rhyme or no rhyme,
    There is thy gold. I will not break the spell,
    Or thou mayst live to bury us one and all!"
        "And, if I live so long," the old man replied,
    Lighting his lanthorn, "you may trust me, sirs,
    Mine Inn is quiet, and I can find you beds
    Where Queens might sleep all night and never move.
    Good-night, sirs, and God bless you, one and all."
      He shouldered pick and spade. I opened the door.
    The snow blew in, and, as he shuffled out,
    There, in the strait dark passage, I could swear
    I saw a spark of red upon his hand,
    Like a great smouldering ruby.
                                   I gasped. He stopped.
    He peered at me.
                     "Twice in a night," he said.
    "Nothing," I answered, "only the lanthorn-light."
    He shook his head. "I'll tell you something more!
    There's nothing, nothing now in life or death
    That frightens me. Ah, things used to frighten me.
    But never now. I thought I had ten years;
    But if the warning comes and says '_Thou fool,
    This night!_' Why, then, I'm ready."
                                            I watched him go,
    With glimmering lanthorn up the narrow street,
    Like one that walked upon the clouds, through snow
    That seemed to mix the City with the skies.

    On Christmas Eve we heard that he was dead.


VIII

FLOS MERCATORUM

    FLOS MERCATORUM! On that night of nights
    We drew from out our Mermaid cellarage
    All the old glory of London in one cask
    Of magic vintage. Never a city on earth--
    Rome, Paris, Florence, Bagdad--held for Ben
    The colours of old London; and, that night,
    We staved them like a wine, and drank, drank deep!

    'Twas Master Heywood, whom the Mermaid Inn
    Had dubbed our London laureate, hauled the cask
    Out of its ancient harbourage. "Ben," he cried,
    Bustling into the room with Dekker and Brome,
    "The prentices are up!" Ben raised his head
    Out of the chimney-corner where he drowsed,
    And listened, reaching slowly for his pipe.

    "_Clerk of the Bow Bell_," all along the Cheape
    There came a shout that swelled into a roar.
      "What! Will they storm the Mermaid?" Heywood laughed,
    "They are turning into Bread Street!"
                                          Down they came!
    We heard them hooting round the poor old Clerk--
    "Clubs! Clubs! The rogue would have us work all night!
    He rang ten minutes late! Fifteen, by Paul's!"
    And over the hubbub rose, like a thin bell,
    The Clerk's entreaty--"Now, good boys, good boys,
    Children of Cheape, be still, I do beseech you!
    I took some forty winks, but then...." A roar
    Of wrathful laughter drowned him--"Forty winks!
    Remember Black May-day! We'll make you wink!"
    There was a scuffle, and into the tavern rushed
    Gregory Clopton, Clerk of the Bow Bell,--
    A tall thin man, with yellow hair a-stream,
    And blazing eyes.
                      "Hide me," he clamoured, "quick!
    These picaroons will murder me!"
                                     I closed
    The thick oak doors against the coloured storm
    Of prentices in red and green and ray,
    Saffron and Reading tawny. Twenty clubs
    Drubbed on the panels as I barred them out;
    And even our walls and shutters could not drown
    Their song that, like a mocking peal of bells,
    Under our windows, made all Bread Street ring:--

                "_Clerk of the Bow Bell,
                  With the yellow locks,
                For thy late ringing
                  Thy head shall have knocks!_"

    Then Heywood, seeing the Clerk was all a-quake,
    Went to an upper casement that o'er-looked
    The whole of Bread Street. Heywood knew their ways,
    And parleyed with them till their anger turned
    To shouts of merriment. Then, like one deep bell
    His voice rang out, in answer to their peal:--

                "_Children of Cheape,
                  Hold you all still!
                You shall have Bow Bell
                  Rung at your will!_"

    Loudly they cheered him. Courteously he bowed,
    Then firmly shut the window; and, ere I filled
    His cup with sack again, the crowd had gone.

    "My clochard, sirs, is warm," quavered the Clerk.
    "I do confess I took some forty winks!
    They are good lads, our prentices of Cheape,
    But hasty!"
                "Wine!" said Ben. He filled a cup
    And thrust it into Gregory's trembling hands.
    "Yours is a task," said Dekker, "a great task!
    You sit among the gods, a lord of time,
    Measuring out the pulse of London's heart."
      "Yea, sir, above the hours and days and years,
    I sometimes think. 'Tis a great Bell--the Bow!
    And hath been, since the days of Whittington."
      "The good old days," growled Ben. "Both good and bad
    Were measured by my Bell," the Clerk replied.
    And, while he spoke, warmed by the wine, his voice
    Mellowed and floated up and down the scale
    As if the music of the London bells
    Lingered upon his tongue. "I know them all,
    And love them, all the voices of the bells.

    FLOS MERCATORUM! That's the Bell of Bow
    Remembering Richard Whittington. You should hear
    The bells of London when they tell his tale.
    Once, after hearing them, I wrote it down.
    I know the tale by heart now, every turn."
      "Then ring it out," said Heywood.
                                        Gregory smiled
    And cleared his throat.
                            "You must imagine, sirs,
    The Clerk, sitting on high, among the clouds,
    With London spread beneath him like a map.
    Under his tower, a flock of prentices
    Calling like bells, of little size or weight,
    But bells no less, ask that the Bell of Bow
    Shall tell the tale of Richard Whittington,
    As thus."
              Then Gregory Clopton, mellowing all
    The chiming vowels, and dwelling on every tone
    In rhythm or rhyme that helped to swell the peal
    Or keep the ringing measure, beat for beat,
    Chanted this legend of the London bells:--

    Clerk of the Bow Bell, four and twenty prentices,
      All upon a Hallowe'en, we prithee, for our joy,
    Ring a little turn again for sweet Dick Whittington,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, and a barefoot boy!--

    "Children of Cheape," did that old Clerk answer,
      "You will have a peal, then, for well may you know,
    All the bells of London remember Richard Whittington
      When they hear the voice of the big Bell of Bow!"--

    Clerk with the yellow locks, mellow be thy malmsey!
      He was once a prentice, and carolled in the Strand!
    Ay, and we are all, too, Marchaunt Adventurers,
      Prentices of London, and lords of Engeland.

    "Children of Cheape," did that old Clerk answer,
      "Hold you, ah hold you, ah hold you all still!
    Souling if you come to the glory of a Prentice,
      You shall have the Bow Bell rung at your will!"

    "Whittington! Whittington! O, turn again, Whittington,
      Lord Mayor of London," the big Bell began:
    "Where was he born? O, at Pauntley in Gloucestershire
      Hard by Cold Ashton, Cold Ashton," it ran.

    "_Flos Mercatorum_," moaned the bell of All Hallowes,
      "There was he an orphan, O, a little lad alone!"
    "Then we all sang," echoed happy St. Saviour's,
      "Called him, and lured him, and made him our own.

    Told him a tale as he lay upon the hillside,
      Looking on his home in the meadow-lands below!"
    "Told him a tale," clanged the bell of Cold Abbey;
      "Told him the truth," boomed the big Bell of Bow!

    Sang of a City that was like a blazoned missal-book,
      Black with oaken gables, carven and inscrolled;
    Every street a coloured page, and every sign a hieroglyph,
      Dusky with enchantments, a City paved with gold;

    "Younger son, younger son, up with stick and bundle!"--
      Even so we rung for him--"But--kneel before you go;
    Watch by your shield, lad, in little Pauntley Chancel,
      Look upon the painted panes that hold your Arms a-glow,--

    Coat of Gules and Azure; but the proud will not remember it!
      And the Crest a Lion's Head, until the new be won!
    Far away, remember it! And O, remember this, too,--
      Every barefoot boy on earth is but a younger son."

    Proudly he answered us, beneath the painted window,--
      "Though I be a younger son, the glory falls to me:
    While my brother bideth by a little land in Gloucestershire,
      All the open Earth is mine, and all the Ocean-sea.

    Yet will I remember, yet will I remember,
      By the chivalry of God, until my day be done,
    When I meet a gentle heart, lonely and unshielded,
      Every barefoot boy on earth is but a younger son!"

    Then he looked to Northward for the tall ships of Bristol;
      Far away, and cold as death, he saw the Severn shine:
    Then he looked to Eastward, and he saw a string of colours
      Trickling through the grey hills, like elfin drops of wine;

    Down along the Mendip dale, the chapmen and their horses,
      Far away, and carrying each its little coloured load,
    Winding like a fairy-tale, with pack and corded bundle,
      Trickled like a crimson thread along the silver road.

    Quick he ran to meet them, stick and bundle on his shoulder!
      Over by Cold Ashton, he met them trampling down,--
    White shaggy horses with their packs of purple spicery,
      Crimson kegs of malmsey, and the silks of London town.

    When the chapmen asked of him the bridle-path to Dorset,
      Blithely he showed them, and he led them on their way,
    Led them through the fern with their bales of breathing Araby,
      Led them to a bridle-path that saved them half a day.

    Merrily shook the silver bells that hung the broidered bridle-rein,
      Chiming to his hand, as he led them through the fern,
    Down to deep Dorset, and the wooded Isle of Purbeck,
      Then--by little Kimmeridge--they led him turn for turn.

    Down by little Kimmeridge, and up by Hampshire forest-roads,
      Round by Sussex violets, and apple-bloom of Kent,
    Singing songs of London, telling tales of London,
      All the way to London, with packs of wool they went.

    "London was London, then! A clean, clear moat
    Girdled her walls that measured, round about,
    Three miles or less. She is big and dirty now,"
    Said Dekker.
                 "Call it a silver moat," growled Ben,
    "That's the new poetry! Call it crystal, lad!
    But, till you kiss the Beast, you'll never find
    Your Fairy Prince. Why, all those crowded streets,
    Flung all their filth, their refuse, rags and bones,
    Dead cats and dogs, into your clean clear moat,
    And made it sluggish as old Acheron.
    Fevers and plagues, death in a thousand shapes
    Crawled out of it. London was dirty, lad;
    And till you kiss that fact, you'll never see
    The glory of this old Jerusalem!"
      "Ay, 'tis the fogs that make the sunset red,"
    Answered Tom Heywood. "London is earthy, coarse,
    Grimy and grand. You must make dirt the ground,
    Or lose the colours of friend Clopton's tale.
    Ring on!" And, nothing loth, the Clerk resumed:--

    Bravely swelled his heart to see the moat of London glittering
      Round her mighty wall--they told him--two miles long!
    Then--he gasped as, echoing in by grim black Aldgate,
      Suddenly their shaggy nags were nodding through a throng:

    Prentices in red and ray, marchaunts in their saffron,
      Aldermen in violets, and minstrels in white,
    Clerks in homely hoods of budge, and wives with crimson wimples,
      Thronging as to welcome him that happy summer night.

    "Back," they cried, and "Clear the way," and caught the ringing
        bridle-reins:
      "Wait! the Watch is going by, this vigil of St. John!"
    Merrily laughed the chapmen then, reining their great white horses back,
      "When the pageant passes, lad, we'll up and follow on!"

    There, as thick the crowd surged, beneath the blossomed ale-poles,
      Lifting up to Whittington a fair face afraid,
    Swept against his horse by a billow of madcap prentices,
      Hard against the stirrup breathed a green-gowned maid.

    Swift he drew her up and up, and throned her there before him,
      High above the throng with her laughing April eyes,
    Like a Queen of Faërie on the great pack-saddle.
      "Hey!" laughed the chapmen, "the prentice wins the prize!"

    "Whittington! Whittington! the world is all before you!"
      Blithely rang the bells and the steeples rocked and reeled!
    Then--he saw her eyes grow wide, and, all along by Leaden Hall,
      Drums rolled, earth shook, and shattering trumpets pealed.

    Like a marching sunset, there, from Leaden Hall to Aldgate,
      Flared the crimson cressets--O, her brows were haloed then!--
    Then the stirring steeds went by with all their mounted trumpeters,
      Then, in ringing harness, a thousand marching men.

    Marching--marching--his heart and all the halberdiers,
      And his pulses throbbing with the throbbing of the drums;
    Marching--marching--his blood and all the burganets!
      "Look," she cried, "O, look," she cried, "and now the morrice comes!"

    Dancing--dancing--her eyes and all the Lincoln Green,
      Robin Hood and Friar Tuck, dancing through the town!
    "Where is Marian?" Laughingly she turned to Richard Whittington.
      "Here," he said, and pointed to her own green gown.

    Dancing--dancing--her heart and all the morrice-bells!
      Then there burst a mighty shout from thrice a thousand throats!
    Then, with all their bows bent, and sheaves of peacock arrows,
      Marched the tall archers in their white silk coats,

    White silk coats, with the crest of London City
      Crimson on the shoulder, a sign for all to read,--
    Marching--marching--and then the sworded henchmen,
      Then, William Walworth, on his great stirring steed.

    _Flos Mercatorum_, ay, the fish-monger, Walworth,--
      He whose nets of silk drew the silver from the tide,
    He who saved the king when the king was but a prentice,--
      Lord Mayor of London, with his sword at his side!

    Burned with magic changes, his blood and all the pageantry;
      Burned with deep sea-changes, the wonder in her eyes;
    _Flos Mercatorum!_ 'Twas the rose-mary of Paphos,
      Reddening all the City for the prentice and his prize!

    All the book of London, the pages of adventure,
      Passed before the prentice on that vigil of St. John:
    Then the chapmen shook their reins,--"We'll ride behind the revelry,
      Round again to Cornhill! Up, and follow on!"

    Riding on his pack-horse, above the shouting multitude,
      There she turned and smiled at him, and thanked him for his grace:
    "Let me down by _Red Rose Lane_," and, like a wave of twilight
      While she spoke, her shadowy hair--touched his tingling face.

    When they came to _Red Rose Lane_, beneath the blossomed ale-poles,
      Light along his arm she lay, a moment, leaping down:
    Then she waved "farewell" to him, and down the Lane he watched her
      Flitting through the darkness in her gay green gown.

    All along the Cheape, as he rode among the chapmen,
      Round by _Black Friars_, to the _Two-Necked Swan_
    Coloured like the sunset, prentices and maidens
      Danced for red roses on the vigil of St. John.

    Over them were jewelled lamps in great black galleries,
      Garlanded with beauty, and burning all the night;
    All the doors were shadowy with orpin and St. John's wort,
      Long fennel, green birch, and lilies of delight.

    "He should have slept here at the Mermaid Inn,"
    Said Heywood as the chanter paused for breath.
    "What? Has our Mermaid sung so long?" cried Ben.
    "Her beams are black enough. There was an Inn,"
    Said Tom, "that bore the name; and through its heart
    There flowed the right old purple. I like to think
    It was the same, where Lydgate took his ease
    After his hood was stolen; and Gower, perchance;
    And, though he loved the _Tabard_ for a-while,
    I like to think the Father of us all,
    The old Adam of English minstrelsy caroused
    Here in the Mermaid Tavern. I like to think
    Jolly Dan Chaucer, with his kind shrewd face
    Fresh as an apple above his fur-fringed gown,
    One plump hand sporting with his golden chain,
    Looked out from that old casement over the sign,
    And saw the pageant, and the shaggy nags,
    With Whittington, and his green-gowned maid, go by.
      "O, very like," said Clopton, "for the bells
    Left not a head indoors that night." He drank
    A draught of malmsey--and thus renewed his tale:--

    "_Flos Mercatorum_," mourned the bell of All Hallowes,
      "There was he an orphan, O, a little lad alone,
    Rubbing down the great white horses for a supper!"
      "True," boomed the Bow Bell, "his hands were his own!"

    Where did he sleep? On a plump white wool-pack,
      Open to the moon on that vigil of St. John,
    Sheltered from the dew, where the black-timbered gallery
      Frowned above the yard of the _Two-Necked Swan_.

    Early in the morning, clanged the bell of St. Martin's,
      Early in the morning, with a groat in his hand,
    Mournfully he parted with the jolly-hearted chapmen,
      Shouldered his bundle and walked into the _Strand_;

    Walked into the _Strand_, and back again to _West Cheape_,
      Staring at the wizardry of every painted sign,
    Dazed with the steeples and the rich heraldic cornices
      Drinking in the colours of the Cheape like wine.

    All about the booths now, the parti-coloured prentices
      Fluted like a flock of birds along a summer lane,
    Green linnets, red caps, and gay gold finches,--
      _What d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack again?_

    "Buy my dainty doublets, cut on double taffetas,
      Buy my Paris thread," they cried, and caught him by the hand,
    "Laces for your Heart's-Delight, and lawns to make her love you,
      Cambric for her wimple, O, the finest in the land."

    Ah, but he was hungry, foot-sore, weary,
      Knocking at the doors of the armourers that day!
    _What d'ye lack?_ they asked of him; but no man lacked a prentice:
      When he told them what he lacked, they frowned and turned away.

    Hard was his bed that night, beneath a cruel archway,
      Down among the hulks, with his heart growing cold!
    London is a rare town, but O, the streets of London,
      Red though their flints be, they are not red with gold.

    Pale in the dawn, ere he marched on his adventure,
      Starving for a crust, did he kneel a-while again,
    Then, upon the fourth night, he cried, O, like a wounded bird
      "Let me die, if die I must, in _Red Rose Lane_."

    Like a little wounded bird he trailed through the darkness,
      Laid him on a door-step, and then--O, like a breath
    Pitifully blowing out his life's little rushlight,
      Came a gush of blackness, a swoon deep as death.

    Then he heard a rough voice! Then he saw a lanthorn!
      Then he saw a bearded face, and blindly wondered whose:
    Then--a marchaunt's portly legs, with great Rose-Windows,
      Bigger than St. Paul's, he thought, embroidered on his shoes.

    "Alice!" roared the voice, and then, O like a lilied angel,
      Leaning from the lighted door a fair face afraid,
    Leaning over _Red Rose Lane_, O, leaning out of Paradise,
      Drooped the sudden glory of his green-gowned maid!

       *   *   *   *

    "O, mellow be thy malmsey," grunted Ben,
    Filling the Clerk another cup.
                                   "The peal,"
    Quoth Clopton, "is not ended; but the pause
    In ringing, chimes to a deep inward ear
    And tells its own deep tale. Silence and sound,
    Darkness and light, mourning and mirth,--no tale,
    No painting, and no music, nay, no world,
    If God should cut their fruitful marriage-knot.
    A shallow sort to-day would fain deny
    A hell, sirs, to this boundless universe.
    To such I say 'no hell, no Paradise!'
    Others would fain deny the topless towers
    Of heaven, and make this earth a hell indeed.
    To such I say, 'the unplumbed gulfs of grief
    Are only theirs for whom the blissful chimes
    Ring from those unseen heights.' This earth, mid-way,
    Hangs like a belfry where the ringers grasp
    Their ropes in darkness, each in his own place,
    Each knowing, by the tune in his own heart,
    Never by sight, when he must toss through heaven
    The tone of his own bell. Those bounded souls
    Have never heard our chimes! Why, sirs, myself
    Simply by running up and down the scale
    Descend to hell or soar to heaven. My bells
    Height above height, deep below deep, respond!
    Their scale is infinite. Dare I, for one breath,
    Dream that one note hath crowned and ended all,
    Sudden I hear, far, far above those clouds,
    Like laughing angels, peal on golden peal,
    Innumerable as drops of April rain,
    Yet every note distinct, round as a pearl,
    And perfect in its place, a chime of law,
    Whose pure and boundless mere arithmetic
    Climbs with my soul to God."
                                 Ben looked at him,
    Gently. "Resume, old moralist," he said.
    "On to thy marriage-bells!"
                                "The fairy-tales
    Are wiser than they know, sirs. All our woes
    Lead on to those celestial marriage-bells.
    The world's a-wooing; and the pure City of God
    Peals for the wedding of our joy and pain!
    This was well seen of Richard Whittington;
    For only he that finds the London streets
    Paved with red flints, at last shall find them paved
    Like to the Perfect City, with pure gold.
    Ye know the world! what was a London waif
    To Hugh Fitzwarren's daughter? He was fed
    And harboured; and the cook declared she lacked
    A scullion. So, in Hugh Fitzwarren's house,
    He turned the jack, and scoured the dripping-pan.
    How could he hope for more?
                                This marchaunt's house
    Was builded like a great high-gabled inn,
    Square, with a galleried courtyard, such as now
    The players use. Its rooms were rich and dim
    With deep-set coloured panes and massy beams.
    Its ancient eaves jutted o'er _Red Rose Lane_
    Darkly, like eyebrows of a mage asleep.
    Its oaken stair coiled upward through a dusk
    Heavy with fume of scented woods that burned
    To keep the Plague away,--a gloom to embalm
    A Pharaoh, but to dull the cheek and eye
    Of country lads like Whittington.
                                      He pined
    For wind and sunlight. Yet he plied his task
    Patient as in old tales of Elfin-land,
    The young knight would unhelm his golden locks
    And play the scullion, so that he might watch
    His lady's eyes unknown, and oftener hear
    Her brook-like laughter rippling overhead;
    Her green gown, like the breath of Eden boughs,
    Rustling nigh him. And all day long he found
    Sunshine enough in this. But when at night
    He crept into the low dark vaulted den,
    The cobwebbed cellar, where the cook had strewn
    The scullion's bed of straw (and none too thick
    Lest he should sleep too long), he choked for breath;
    And, like an old man hoarding up his life,
    Fostered his glimmering rushlight as he sate
    Bolt upright, while a horrible scurry heaved
    His rustling bed, and bright black-beaded eyes
    Peered at him from the crannies of the wall.
    Then darkness whelmed him, and perchance he slept,--
    Only to fight with nightmares and to fly
    Down endless tunnels in a ghastly dream,
    Hunted by horrible human souls that took
    The shape of monstrous rats, great chattering snouts,
    Vile shapes of shadowy cunning and grey greed,
    That gnaw through beams, and undermine tall towns,
    And carry the seeds of plague and ruin and death
    Under the careless homes of sleeping men.
      Thus, in the darkness, did he wage a war
    With all the powers of darkness. 'If the light
    Do break upon me, by the grace of God,'
    So did he vow, 'O, then will I remember,
    Then, then, will I remember, ay, and help
    To build that lovelier City which is paved
    For rich and poor alike, with purest gold.'

    Ah, sirs, he kept his vow. Ye will not smile
    If, at the first, the best that he could do
    Was with his first poor penny-piece to buy
    A cat, and bring her home, under his coat
    By stealth (or else that termagant, the cook,
    Had drowned it in the water-butt, nor deemed
    The water worse to drink). So did he quell
    First his own plague, but bettered others, too.
    Now, in those days, Marchaunt Adventurers
    Shared with their prentices the happy chance
    Of each new venture. Each might have his stake,
    Little or great, upon the glowing tides
    Of high romance that washed the wharfs of Thames;
    And every lad in London had his groat
    Or splendid shilling on some fair ship at sea.

    So, on an April eve, Fitzwarren called
    His prentices together; for, ere long,
    The _Unicorn_, his tall new ship, must sail
    Beyond the world to gather gorgeous webs
    From Eastern looms, great miracles of silk
    Dipt in the dawn by wizard hands of Ind;
    Or, if they chanced upon that fabled coast
    Where Sydon, river of jewels, like a snake
    Slides down the gorge its coils of crimson fire,
    Perchance a richer cargo,--rubies, pearls,
    Or gold bars from the Gates of Paradise.
    And many a moon, at least, a faërie foam
    Would lap Blackfriars wharf, where London lads
    Gazed in the sunset down that misty reach
    For old black battered hulks and tattered sails
    Bringing their dreams home from the uncharted sea.

    And one flung down a groat--he had no more.
    One staked a shilling, one a good French crown;
    And one an angel, O, light-winged enough
    To reach Cathay; and not a lad but bought
    His pennyworth of wonder,
                              So they thought,
    Till all at once Fitzwarren's daughter cried
    'Father, you have forgot poor Whittington!'
    "Snails,' laughed the rosy marchaunt, 'but that's true!
    Fetch Whittington! The lad must stake his groat!
    'Twill bring us luck!'
                           'Whittington! Whittington!'
    Down the dark stair, like a gold-headed bird,
    Fluttered sweet Alice. 'Whittington! Richard! Quick!
    Quick with your groat now for the _Unicorn_!'

    'A groat!' cried Whittington, standing there aghast,
    With brown bare arms, still coloured by the sun,
    Among his pots and pans. 'Where should I find
    A groat? I staked my last groat in a cat!'
    --'What! Have you nothing? Nothing but a cat?
    Then stake the cat,' she said; and the quick fire
    That in a woman's mind out-runs the thought
    Of man, lit her grey eyes.
                               Whittington laughed
    And opened the cellar-door. Out sailed his wealth,
    Waving its tail, purring, and rubbing its head
    Now on his boots, now on the dainty shoe
    Of Alice, who straightway, deaf to his laughing prayers,
    Caught up the cat, whispered it, hugged it close,
    Against its grey fur leaned her glowing cheek,
    And carried it off in triumph.

                                 _Red Rose Lane_
    Echoed with laughter as, with amber eyes
    Blinking, the grey cat in a seaman's arms
    Went to the wharf. 'Ay, but we need a cat,'
    The captain said. So, when the painted ship
    Sailed through a golden sunrise down the Thames,
    A grey tail waved upon the misty poop,
    And Whittington had his venture on the seas.

    It was a nine days' jest, and soon forgot.
    But, all that year,--ah, sirs, ye know the world,
    For all the foolish boasting of the proud,
    Looks not beneath the coat of Taunton serge
    For Gules and Azure. A prince that comes in rags
    To clean your shoes and, out of his own pride,
    Waits for the world to paint his shield again
    Must wait for ever and a day.
                                     The world
    Is a great hypocrite, hypocrite most of all
    When thus it boasts its purple pride of race,
    Then with eyes blind to all but pride of place
    Tramples the scullion's heraldry underfoot,
    Nay, never sees it, never dreams of it,
    Content to know that, here and now, his coat
    Is greasy....
                  So did Whittington find at last
    Such nearness was most distant; that to see her,
    Talk with her, serve her thus, was but to lose
    True sight, true hearing.   He must save his life
    By losing it; forsake, to win, his love;
    Go out into the world to bring her home.
    It was but labour lost to clean the shoes,
    And turn the jack, and scour the dripping-pan.
    For every scolding blown about her ears
    The cook's great ladle fell upon the head
    Of Whittington; who, beneath her rule, became
    The scullery's general scapegoat.    It was he
    That burned the pie-crust, drank the hippocras,
    Dinted the silver beaker....
                                  Many a month
    He chafed, till his resolve took sudden shape
    And, out of the dark house at the peep of day,
    Shouldering bundle and stick again, he stole
    To seek his freedom, and to shake the dust
    Of London from his shoes....
                                 You know the stone
    On Highgate, where he sate awhile to rest,
    With aching heart, and thought 'I shall not see
    Her face again.' There, as the coloured dawn
    Over the sleeping City slowly bloomed,
    A small black battered ship with tattered sails
    Blurring the burnished glamour of the Thames
    Crept, side-long to a wharf.
                                 Then, all at once,
    The London bells rang out a welcome home;
    And, over them all, tossing the tenor on high,
    The Bell of Bow, a sun among the stars,
    Flooded the morning air with this refrain:--

    'Turn again, Whittington! Turn again, Whittington!
      _Flos Mercatorum_, thy ship hath come home!
    Trailing from her cross-trees the crimson of the sunrise,
      Dragging all the glory of the sunset thro' the foam.
              Turn again, Whittington,
              Turn again, Whittington,
                Lord Mayor of London!

    Turn again, Whittington! When thy hope was darkest,
      Far beyond the sky-line a ship sailed for thee.
    _Flos Mercatorum_, O, when thy faith was blindest,
      Even then thy sails were set beyond the Ocean-sea.'

    So he heard and heeded us, and turned again to London,
      Stick and bundle on his back, he turned to _Red Rose Lane_,
    Hardly hearing as he went the chatter of the prentices,--
      _What d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack, and what d'ye lack again?_

    Back into the scullery, before the cook had missed him,
      Early in the morning his labours he began:
    Once again to clean the shoes and clatter with the water-pail,
      Once again to scrub the jack and scour the dripping-pan.

    All the bells of London were pealing as he laboured.
      Wildly beat his heart, and his blood began to race.
    Then--there came a light step and, suddenly, beside him
      Stood his lady Alice, with a light upon her face.

    'Quick,' she said, 'O, quick,' she said, 'they want you,
        Richard Whittington!'
      'Quick,' she said; and, while she spoke, her lighted eyes betrayed
    All that she had hidden long, and all she still would hide from him.
      So--he turned and followed her, his green-gowned maid.

       *   *   *   *

    There, in a broad dark oaken-panelled room
    Rich with black carvings and great gleaming cups
    Of silver, sirs, and massy halpace built
    Half over _Red Rose Lane_, Fitzwarren sat;
    And, at his side, O, like an old romance
    That suddenly comes true and fills the world
    With April colours, two bronzed seamen stood,
    Tattered and scarred, and stained with sun and brine.
    '_Flos Mercatorum_,' Hugh Fitzwarren cried,
    Holding both hands out to the pale-faced boy,
    'The prentice wins the prize! Why, Whittington,
    Thy cat hath caught the biggest mouse of all!'
    And, on to the table, tilting a heavy sack,
    One of the seamen poured a glittering stream
    Of rubies, emeralds, opals, amethysts,
    That turned the room to an Aladdin's cave,
    Or magic goblet brimmed with dusky wine
    Where clustering rainbow-coloured bubbles clung
    And sparkled, in the halls of Prester John.

    'And that,' said Hugh Fitzwarren, 'is the price
    Paid for your cat in Barbary, by a King
    Whose house was rich in gems, but sorely plagued
    With rats and mice. Gather it up, my lad,
    And praise your master for his honesty;
    For, though my cargo prospered, yours outshines
    The best of it. Take it, my lad, and go;
    You're a rich man; and, if you use it well,
    Riches will make you richer, and the world
    Will prosper in your own prosperity.
    The miser, like the cold and barren moon,
    Shines with a fruitless light. The spendthrift fool
    Flits like a Jack-o-Lent over quags and fens;
    But he that's wisely rich gathers his gold
    Into a fruitful and unwasting sun
    That spends its glory on a thousand fields
    And blesses all the world. Take it and go.'

    Blankly, as in a dream, Whittington stared.
    'How should I take it, sir? The ship was yours,
    And ...'
             'Ay, the ship was mine; but in that ship
    Your stake was richer than we knew. 'Tis yours.'
      'Then,' answered Whittington, 'if this wealth be mine,
    Who but an hour ago was all so poor,
    I know one way to make me richer still.'
    He gathered up the glittering sack of gems,
    Turned to the halpace, where his green-gowned maid
    Stood in the glory of the coloured panes.
    He thrust the splendid load into her arms,
    Muttering--'Take it, lady! Let me be poor!
    But rich, at least, in that you not despise
    The waif you saved.'
                        --'Despise you, Whittington?'--
    'O, no, not in the sight of God! But I
    Grow tired of waiting for the Judgment Day!
    I am but a man. I am a scullion now;
    But I would like, only for half an hour,
    To stand upright and say "I am a king!"
    Take it!'
              And, as they stood, a little apart,
    Their eyes were married in one swift level look,
    Silent, but all that souls could say was said.

       *   *   *   *

                                                   And
    'I know a way,' said the Bell of St. Martin's.
      'Tell it, and be quick,' laughed the prentices below!
    'Whittington shall marry her, marry her, marry her!
      Peal for a wedding,' said the big Bell of Bow.

    He shall take a kingdom up, and cast it on the sea again;
      He shall have his caravels to traffic for him now;
    He shall see his royal sails rolling up from Araby,
     And the crest--a honey-bee--golden at the prow.

    Whittington! Whittington! The world is all a fairy tale!--
      Even so we sang for him.--But O, the tale is true!
    Whittington he married her, and on his merry marriage-day,
      O, we sang, we sang for him, like lavrocks in the blue.

    Far away from London, these happy prentice lovers
      Wandered through the fern to his western home again,
    Down by deep Dorset to the wooded isle of Purbeck,
      Round to little Kimmeridge, by many a lover's lane.

    There did they abide as in a dove-cote hidden
      Deep in happy woods until the bells of duty rang;
    Then they rode the way he went, a barefoot boy to London,
      Round by Hampshire forest-roads, but as they rode he sang:--

    _Kimmeridge in Dorset is the happiest of places!
      All the little homesteads are thatched with beauty there!
    All the old ploughmen, there, have happy smiling faces,
      Christmas roses in their cheeks, and crowns of silver hair.

    Blue as are the eggs in the nest of the hedge-sparrow,
      Gleam the little rooms in the homestead that I know:
    Death, I think, has lost the way to Kimmeridge in Dorset;
      Sorrow never knew it, or forgot it, long ago!

    Kimmeridge in Dorset, Kimmeridge in Dorset,
      Though I may not see you more thro' all the years to be,
    Yet will I remember the little happy homestead
      Hidden in that Paradise where God was good to me._

       *   *   *   *

    So they turned to London, and with mind and soul he laboured,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, for the mighty years to be,
    Fashioning, for profit--to the years that should forget him!--
      This, our sacred City that must shine upon the sea.

    London was a City when the Poulters ruled the Poultry!
      Rosaries of prayer were hung in Paternoster Row,
    Gutter Lane was Guthrun's, then; and, bright with painted missal-books,
      _Ave Mary Corner_, sirs, was fairer than ye know.

    London was mighty when her marchaunts loved their merchandise,
      Bales of Eastern magic that empurpled wharf and quay:
    London was mighty when her booths were a dream-market,
      Loaded with the colours of the sunset and the sea.

    There, in all their glory, with the Virgin on their bannerols,
      Glory out of Genoa, the Mercers might be seen,
    Walking to their Company of Marchaunt Adventurers;--
      Gallantly they jetted it in scarlet and in green.

    There, in all the glory of the lordly Linen Armourers,
      Walked the Marchaunt Taylors with the Pilgrim of their trade,
    Fresh from adventuring in Italy and Flanders,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, for a green-gowned maid.

    _Flos Mercatorum!_ Can a good thing come of Nazareth?
      High above the darkness, where our duller senses drown,
    Lifts the splendid Vision of a City, built on merchandise,
      Fairer than that City of Light that wore the violet crown,

    Lifts the sacred vision of a far-resplendent City,
      Flashing, like the heart of heaven, its messages afar,
    Trafficking, as God Himself through all His interchanging worlds,
      Holding up the scales of law, weighing star by star,

    Stern as Justice, in one hand the sword of Truth and Righteousness;
      Blind as Justice, in one hand the everlasting scales,
    Lifts the sacred Vision of that City from the darkness,
      Whence the thoughts of men break out, like blossoms, or like sails!

    Ordered and harmonious, a City built to music,
      Lifting, out of chaos, the shining towers of law,--
    Ay, a sacred City, and a City built of merchandise,
      _Flos Mercatorum_, was the City that he saw.

    And by that light," quoth Clopton, "did he keep
    His promise. He was rich; but in his will
    He wrote those words which should be blazed with gold
    In London's _Liber Albus_:--

                                     _The desire
        And busy intention of a man, devout
        And wise, should be to fore-cast and secure
        The state and end of this short life with deeds
        Of mercy and pity, especially to provide
        For those whom poverty insulteth, those
        To whom the power of labouring for the needs
        Of life, is interdicted._
                                 He became
    The Father of the City. Felons died
    Of fever in old Newgate. He rebuilt
    The prison. London sickened, from the lack
    Of water, and he made fresh fountains flow.
    He heard the cry of suffering and disease,
    And built the stately hospital that still
    Shines like an angel's lanthorn through the night,
    The stately halls of St. Bartholomew.
    He saw men wrapt in ignorance, and he raised
    Schools, colleges, and libraries. He heard
    The cry of the old and weary, and he built
    Houses of refuge.
                      Even so he kept
    His prentice vows of Duty, Industry,
    Obedience, words contemned of every fool
    Who shrinks from law; yet were those ancient vows
    The adamantine pillars of the State.
    Let all who play their Samson be well warned
    That Samsons perish, too!
                              His monument
    Is London!"

                   "True," quoth Dekker, "and he deserves
    Well of the Mermaid Inn for one good law,
    Rightly enforced. He pilloried that rogue
    Will Horold, who in Whittington's third year
    Of office, as Lord Mayor, placed certain gums
    And spices in great casks, and filled them up
    With feeble Spanish wine, to have the taste
    And smell of Romeney,--Malmsey!"
                                      "Honest wine,
    Indeed," replied the Clerk, "concerns the State,
    That solemn structure touched with light from heaven,
    Which he, our merchant, helped to build on earth.
    And, while he laboured for it, all things else
    Were added unto him, until the bells
    More than fulfilled their prophecy.
                                        One great eve,
    Fair Alice, leaning from her casement, saw
    Another Watch, and mightier than the first,
    Billowing past the newly painted doors
    Of Whittington Palace--so men called his house
    In Hart Street, fifteen yards from old Mark Lane,--
    thousand burganets and halberdiers;
    A thousand archers in their white silk coats,
    A thousand mounted men in ringing mail,
    A thousand sworded henchmen; then, his Guild,
    Advancing, on their splendid bannerols
    The Virgin, glorious in gold; and then,
    _Flos Mercatorum_, on his great stirring steed
    Whittington! On that night he made a feast
    For London and the King. His feasting hall
    Gleamed like the magic cave that Prester John
    Wrought out of one huge opal. East and West
    Lavished their wealth on that great Citizen
    Who, when the King from Agincourt returned
    Victorious, but with empty coffers, lent
    Three times the ransom of an Emperor
    To fill them--on the royal bond, and said
    When the King questioned him of how and whence,
    'I am the steward of your City, sire!
    There is a sea, and who shall drain it dry?'

      Over the roasted swans and peacock pies,
    The minstrels in the great black gallery tuned
    All hearts to mirth, until it seemed their cups
    Were brimmed with dawn and sunset, and they drank
    The wine of gods. Lord of a hundred ships,
    Under the feet of England, Whittington flung
    The purple of the seas. And when the Queen,
    Catharine, wondered at the costly woods
    That burned upon his hearth, the Marchaunt rose,
    He drew the great sealed parchments from his breast,
    The bonds the King had given him on his loans,
    Loans that might drain the Mediterranean dry.
    'They call us hucksters, madam, we that love
    Our City,' and, into the red-hot heart of the fire,
    He tossed the bonds of sixty thousand pounds.
    'The fire burns low,' said Richard Whittington.
    Then, overhead, the minstrels plucked their strings;
    And, over the clash of wine-cups, rose a song
    That made the old timbers of their feasting-hall
    Shake, as a galleon shakes in a gale of wind,
    When she rolls glorying through the Ocean-sea:--

    Marchaunt Adventurers, O, what shall it profit you
      Thus to seek your kingdom in the dream-destroying sun?
    Ask us why the hawthorn brightens on the sky-line:
      Even so our sails break out when Spring is well begun!
    _Flos Mercatorum!_ Blossom wide, ye sail of Englande,
      Hasten ye the kingdom, now the bitter days are done!
    Ay, for we be members, one of another,
      'Each for all and all for each,' quoth Richard Whittington!

    _Chorus:_--Marchaunt Adventurers,
                     Marchaunt Adventurers,
      Marchaunt Adventurers, the Spring is well begun!
    Break, break out on every sea, O, fair white sails of Englande!
      'Each for all, and all for each,' quoth Richard Whittington.

    Marchaunt Adventurers, O what 'ull ye bring home again?
      Woonders and works and the thunder of the sea!
    Whom will ye traffic with? The King of the sunset!--
      What shall be your pilot, then?--A wind from Galilee!

    --Nay, but ye be marchaunts, will ye come back empty-handed?--
      Ay, we be marchaunts, though our gain we ne'er shall see!
    Cast we now our bread upon the waste wild waters;
      After many days it shall return with usury.

    _Chorus:_--Marchaunt Adventurers,
                      Marchaunt Adventurers,
      What shall be your profit in the mighty days to be?
    Englande! Englande! Englande! Englande!
      Glory everlasting and the lordship of the sea.

    What need to tell you, sirs, how Whittington
    Remembered? Night and morning, as he knelt
    In those old days, O, like two children still,
    Whittington and his Alice bowed their heads
    Together, praying.
                        From such simple hearts,
    O never doubt it, though the whole world doubt
    The God that made it, came the steadfast strength
    Of England, all that once was her strong soul,
    The soul that laughed and shook away defeat
    As her strong cliffs hurl back the streaming seas.
    Sirs, in his old age Whittington returned,
    And stood with Alice, by the silent tomb
    In little Pauntley church.
                               There, to his Arms,
    The Gules and Azure, and the Lion's Head
    So proudly blazoned on the painted panes;
    (O, sirs, the simple wistfulness of it
    Might move hard hearts to laughter, but I think
    Tears tremble through it, for the Mermaid Inn)
    He added his new crest, the hard-won sign
    And lowly prize of his own industry,
    _The Honey-bee_. And, far away, the bells
    Peal softly from the pure white City of God:--
                      _Ut fragrans nardus
                      Fama fuit iste Ricardus._
    With folded hands he waits the Judgment now.
    Slowly our dark bells toll across the world,
    For him who waits the reckoning, his accompt
    Secure, his conscience clear, his ledger spread
    A _Liber Albus_ flooded with pure light.

              _Flos Mercatorum,
              Fundator presbyterorum_,...

    Slowly the dark bells toll for him who asks
    No more of men, but that they may sometimes
    Pray for the souls of Richard Whittington,
    Alice, his wife, and (as themselves of old
    Had prayed) the father and mother of each of them.
    Slowly the great notes fall and float away:--

              _Omnibus exemplum
              Barathrum vincendo morosum
              Condidit hoc templum ...
              Pauperibus pater ...
              Finiit ipse dies
              Sis sibi Christe quies. Amen._"


IX

RALEIGH

    Ben was our only guest that day. His tribe
    Had flown to their new shrine--the Apollo Room,
    To which, though they enscrolled his golden verse
    Above their doors like some great-fruited vine,
    Ben still preferred our _Mermaid_, and to smoke
    Alone in his old nook; perhaps to hear
    The voices of the dead,
    The voices of his old companions.
    Hovering near him,--Will and Kit and Rob.

    "Our Ocean-shepherd from the Main-deep sea,
    Raleigh," he muttered, as I brimmed his cup,
    "Last of the men that broke the fleets of Spain,
    'Twas not enough to cage him, sixteen years,
    Rotting his heart out in the Bloody Tower,
    But they must fling him forth in his old age
    To hunt for El Dorado. Then, mine host,
    Because his poor old ship _The Destiny_
    Smashes the Spaniard, but comes tottering home
    Without the Spanish gold, our gracious king,
    To please a catamite,
    Sends the old lion back to the Tower again.
    The friends of Spain will send him to the block
    This time. That male Salome, Buckingham,
    Is dancing for his head. Raleigh is doomed."
    A shadow stood in the doorway. We looked up;
    And there, but O, how changed, how worn and grey,
    Sir Walter Raleigh, like a hunted thing,
    Stared at us.

                        "Ben," he said, and glanced behind him.
    Ben took a step towards him.
                                    "O, my God,
    Ben," whispered the old man in a husky voice,
    Half timorous and half cunning, so unlike
    His old heroic self that one might weep
    To hear it, "Ben, I have given them all the slip!
    I may be followed. Can you hide me here
    Till it grows dark?"
    Ben drew him quickly in, and motioned me
    To lock the door. "Till it grows dark," he cried,
    "My God, that you should ask it!"
                                          "Do not think,
    Do not believe that I am quite disgraced,"
    The old man faltered, "for they'll say it, Ben;
    And when my boy grows up, they'll tell him, too,
    His father was a coward. I do cling
    To life for many reasons, not from fear
    Of death. No, Ben, I can disdain that still;
    But--there's my boy!"
                              Then all his face went blind.
    He dropt upon Ben's shoulder and sobbed outright,
    "They are trying to break my pride, to break my pride!"
    The window darkened, and I saw a face
    Blurring the panes. Ben gripped the old man's arm,
    And led him gently to a room within,
    Out of the way of guests.
                        "Your pride," he said,
    "That is the pride of England!"
                                    At that name--
    _England!_--
    As at a signal-gun, heard in the night
    Far out at sea, the weather and world-worn man,
    That once was Raleigh, lifted up his head.
    Old age and weakness, weariness and fear
    Fell from him like a cloak. He stood erect.
    His eager eyes, full of great sea-washed dawns,
    Burned for a moment with immortal youth,
    While tears blurred mine to see him.
                                         "You do think
    That England will remember? You do think it?"
    He asked with a great light upon his face.
    Ben bowed his head in silence.

       *   *   *   *

                                   "I have wronged
    My cause by this," said Raleigh. "Well they know it
    Who left this way for me. I have flung myself
    Like a blind moth into this deadly light
    Of freedom. Now, at the eleventh hour,
    Is it too late? I might return and--"
                                          "No!
    Not now!" Ben interrupted. "I'd have said
    Laugh at the headsman sixteen years ago,
    When England was awake. She will awake
    Again. But now, while our most gracious king,
    Who hates tobacco, dedicates his prayers
    To Buckingham--
    This is no land for men that, under God,
    Shattered the Fleet Invincible."
                                     A knock
    Startled us, at the outer door. "My friend
    Stukeley," said Raleigh, "if I know his hand.
    He has a ketch will carry me to France,
    Waiting at Tilbury."
                         I let him in,--
    A lean and stealthy fellow, Sir Lewis Stukeley,--
    liked him little. He thought much of his health,
    More of his money bags, and most of all
    On how to run with all men all at once
    For his own profit. At the _Mermaid Inn_
    Men disagreed in friendship and in truth;
    But he agreed with all men, and his life
    Was one soft quag of falsehood. Fugitives
    Must use false keys, I thought; and there was hope
    For Raleigh if such a man would walk one mile
    To serve him now. Yet my throat moved to see him
    Usurping, with one hand on Raleigh's arm,
    A kind of ownership. "_Lend me ten pounds_,"
    Were the first words he breathed in the old man's ear,
    And Raleigh slipped his purse into his hand.

       *   *   *   *

    Just over Bread Street hung the bruised white moon
    When they crept out. Sir Lewis Stukeley's watch-dog,
    A derelict bo'sun, with a mulberry face,
    Met them outside. "The coast quite clear, eh, Hart?"
    Said Stukeley. "Ah, that's good. Lead on, then, quick."
    And there, framed in the cruddle of moonlit clouds
    That ended the steep street, dark on its light,
    And standing on those glistening cobblestones
    Just where they turned to silver, Raleigh looked back
    Before he turned the corner. He stood there.
    A figure like foot-feathered Mercury,
    Tall, straight and splendid, waving his plumed hat
    To Ben, and taking his last look, I felt,
    Upon our _Mermaid Tavern_. As he paused,
    His long fantastic shadow swayed and swept
    Against our feet. Then, like a shadow, he passed.

    "It is not right," said Ben, "it is not right.
    Why did they give the old man so much grace?
    Witness and evidence are what they lack.
    Would you trust Stukeley--not to draw him out?
    Raleigh was always rash. A phrase or two
    Will turn their murderous axe into a sword
    Of righteousness--

                          Why, come to think of it,
    Blackfriar's Wharf, last night, I landed there,
    And--no, by God!--Raleigh is not himself,
    The tide will never serve beyond Gravesend.
    It is a trap! Come on! We'll follow them!
    Quick! To the river side!"--
                               We reached the wharf
    Only to see their wherry, a small black cloud
    Dwindling far down that running silver road.
    Ben touched my arm.
    "Look there," he said, pointing up-stream.
                                           The moon
    Glanced on a cluster of pikes, like silver thorns,
    Three hundred yards away, a little troop
    Of weaponed men, embarking hurriedly.
    Their great black wherry clumsily swung about,
    Then, with twelve oars for legs, came striding down,
    An armoured beetle on the glittering trail
    Of some small victim.
                                Just below our wharf
    A little dinghy waddled.
    Ben cut the painter, and without one word
    Drew her up crackling thro' the lapping water,
    Motioned me to the tiller, thrust her off,
    And, pulling with one oar, backing with the other,
    Swirled her round and down, hard on the track
    Of Raleigh. Ben was an old man now but tough,
    O tough as a buccaneer. We distanced them.
    His oar blades drove the silver boiling back.
    By Broken Wharf the beetle was a speck.
    It dwindled by Queen Hythe and the Three Cranes.
    By Bellyn's Gate we had left it, out of sight.
    By Custom House and Galley Keye we shot
    Thro' silver all the way, without one glimpse
    Of Raleigh. Then a dreadful shadow fell
    And over us the Tower of London rose
    Like ebony; and, on the glittering reach
    Beyond it, I could see the small black cloud
    That carried the great old seaman slowly down
    Between the dark shores whence in happier years
    The throng had cheered his golden galleons out,
    And watched his proud sails filling for Cathay.
    There, as through lead, we dragged by Traitor's Gate,
    There, in the darkness, under the Bloody Tower,
    There, on the very verge of victory,
    Ben gasped and dropped his oars.
    "Take one and row," he said, "my arms are numbed.
    We'll overtake him yet!" I clambered past him,
    And took the bow oar.

                             Once, as the pace flagged,
    Over his shoulder he turned his great scarred face
    And snarled, with a trickle of blood on his coarse lips,
    "Hard!"--
    And blood and fire ran through my veins again,
    For half a minute more.

                            Yet we fell back.
    Our course was crooked now. And suddenly
    A grim black speck began to grow behind us,
    Grow like the threat of death upon old age.
    Then, thickening, blackening, sharpening, foaming, swept
    Up the bright line of bubbles in our wake,
    That armoured wherry, with its long twelve oars
    All well together now.

                           "Too late," gasped Ben,
    His ash-grey face uplifted to the moon,
    One quivering hand upon the thwart behind him,
    A moment. Then he bowed over his knees
    Coughing. "But we'll delay them. We'll be drunk,
    And hold the catch-polls up!"

                                  We drifted down
    Before them, broadside on. They sheered aside.
    Then, feigning a clumsy stroke, Ben drove our craft
    As they drew level, right in among their blades.
    There was a shout, an oath. They thrust us off;
    And then we swung our nose against their bows
    And pulled them round with every well-meant stroke.
    A full half minute, ere they won quite free,
    Cursing us for a pair of drunken fools.

    We drifted down behind them.

                                  "There's no doubt,"
    Said Ben, "the headsman waits behind all this
    For Raleigh. This is a play to cheat the soul
    Of England, teach the people to applaud
    The red fifth act."
    Without another word we drifted down
    For centuries it seemed, until we came
    To Greenwich.
    Then up the long white burnished reach there crept
    Like little sooty clouds the two black boats
    To meet us.

                  "He is in the trap," said Ben,
    "And does not know it yet. See, where he sits
    By Stukeley as by a friend."

                                 Long after this,
    We heard how Raleigh, simply as a child,
    Seeing the tide would never serve him now,
    And they must turn, had taken from his neck
    Some trinkets that he wore. "Keep them," he said
    To Stukeley, "in remembrance of this night."

    He had no doubts of Stukeley when he saw
    The wherry close beside them. He but wrapped
    His cloak a little closer round his face.
    Our boat rocked in their wash when Stukeley dropped
    The mask. We saw him give the sign, and heard
    His high-pitched quavering voice--"IN THE KING'S NAME!"
    Raleigh rose to his feet. "I am under arrest?"
    He said, like a dazed man.

                                 And Stukeley laughed.
    Then, as he bore himself to the grim end,
    All doubt being over, the old sea-king stood
    Among those glittering points, a king indeed.
    The black boats rocked. We heard his level voice,
    "_Sir Lewis, these actions never will turn out
    To your good credit._" Across the moonlit Thames
    It rang contemptuously, cold as cold steel,
    And passionless as the judgment that ends all.

       *   *   *   *

    Some three months later, Raleigh's widow came
    To lodge a se'nnight at the Mermaid Inn.
    His house in Bread Street was no more her own,
    But in the hands of Stukeley, who had reaped
    A pretty harvest ...
    She kept close to her room, and that same night,
    Being ill and with some fever, sent her maid
    To fetch the apothecary from Friday Street,
    Old "Galen" as the Mermaid christened him.
    At that same moment, as the maid went out,
    Stukeley came in. He met her at the door;
    And, chucking her under the chin, gave her a letter.
    "Take this up to your mistress. It concerns
    Her property," he said. "Say that I wait,
    And would be glad to speak with her."
                                             The wench
    Looked pertly in his face, and tripped upstairs.
    I scarce could trust my hands.
                                   "Sir Lewis," I said,
    "This is no time to trouble her. She is ill."
    "Let her decide," he answered, with a sneer.
    Before I found another word to say
    The maid tripped down again. I scarce believed
    My senses, when she beckoned him up the stair.
    Shaking from head to foot, I blocked the way.
    "Property!" Could the crux of mine and thine
    Bring widow and murderer into one small room?
    "Sir Lewis," I said, "she is ill. It is not right!
    She never would consent."
                                He sneered again,
    "You are her doctor? Out of the way, old fool!
    She has decided!"
                        "Go," I said to the maid,
    "Fetch the apothecary. Let it rest
    With him!"
               She tossed her head. Her quick eyes glanced,
    Showing the white, like the eyes of a vicious mare.
    She laughed at Stukeley, loitered, then obeyed.

    And so we waited, till the wench returned,
    With Galen at her heels. His wholesome face,
    Russet and wrinkled like an apple, peered
    Shrewdly at Stukeley, twinkled once at me,
    And passed in silence, leaving a whiff of herbs
    Behind him on the stair.
                                 Five minutes later,
    To my amazement, that same wholesome face
    Leaned from the lighted door above, and called
    "Sir Lewis Stukeley!"
                           Sir Judas hastened up.
    The apothecary followed him within.
    The door shut. I was left there in the dark
    Bewildered; for my heart was hot with thoughts
    Of those last months. Our Summer's Nightingale,
    Our Ocean-Shepherd from the Main-deep Sea,
    The Founder of our Mermaid Fellowship,
    Was this his guerdon--at the Mermaid Inn?
    Was this that maid-of-honour whose romance
    With Raleigh, once, had been a kingdom's talk?
    Could Bess Throckmorton slight his memory thus?
    "It is not right," I said, "it is not right.
    She wrongs him deeply."
                              I leaned against the porch
    Staring into the night. A ghostly ray
    Above me, from her window, bridged the street,
    And rested on the goldsmith's painted sign
    Opposite.
              I could hear the muffled voice
    Of Stukeley overhead, persuasive, bland;
    And then, her own, cooing, soft as a dove
    Calling her mate from Eden cedar-boughs,
    Flowed on and on; and then--all my flesh crept
    At something worse than either, a long space
    Of silence that stretched threatening and cold,
    Cold as a dagger-point pricking the skin
    Over my heart.
                       Then came a stifled cry,
    A crashing door, a footstep on the stair
    Blundering like a drunkard's, heavily down;
    And with his gasping face one tragic mask
    Of horror,--may God help me to forget
    Some day the frozen awful eyes of one
    Who, fearing neither hell nor heaven, has met
    That ultimate weapon of the gods, the face
    And serpent-tresses that turn flesh to stone--
    Stukeley stumbled, groping his way out,
    Blindly, past me, into the sheltering night.

       *   *   *   *

    It was the last night of another year
    Before I understood what punishment
    Had overtaken Stukeley. Ben, and Brome--
    Ben's ancient servant, but turned poet now--
    Sat by the fire with the old apothecary
    To see the New Year in.
                            The starry night
    Had drawn me to the door. Could it be true
    That our poor earth no longer was the hub
    Of those white wheeling orbs? I scarce believed
    The strange new dreams; but I had seen the veils
    Rent from vast oceans and huge continents,
    Till what was once our comfortable fire,
    Our cosy tavern, and our earthly home
    With heaven beyond the next turn in the road,
    All the resplendent fabric of our world
    Shrank to a glow-worm, lighting up one leaf
    In one small forest, in one little land,
    Among those wild infinitudes of God.
    A tattered wastrel wandered down the street,
    Clad in a seaman's jersey, staring hard
    At every sign. Beneath our own, the light
    Fell on his red carbuncled face. I knew him--
    The bo'sun, Hart.
                        He pointed to our sign
    And leered at me. "That's her," he said, "no doubt,
    The sea-witch with the shiny mackerel tail
    Swishing in wine. That's what Sir Lewis meant.
    He called it blood. Blood is his craze, you see.
    This is the Mermaid Tavern, sir, no doubt?"
    I nodded. "Ah, I thought as much," he said.
    "Well--happen this is worth a cup of ale."
    He thrust his hand under his jersey and lugged
    A greasy letter out. It was inscribed
    THE APOTHECARY AT THE MERMAID TAVERN.

    I led him in. "I knew it, sir," he said,
    While Galen broke the seal. "Soon as I saw
    That sweet young naked wench curling her tail
    In those red waves.--The old man called it blood.
    Blood is his craze, you see.--But you can tell
    'Tis wine, sir, by the foam. Malmsey, no doubt.
    And that sweet wench to make you smack your lips
    Like oysters, with her slippery tail and all!
    Why, sir, no doubt, this was the Mermaid Inn."

    "But this," said Galen, lifting his grave face
    To Ben, "this letter is from all that's left
    Of Stukeley. The good host, there, thinks I wronged
    Your Ocean-shepherd's memory. From this letter,
    I think I helped to avenge him. Do not wrong
    His widow, even in thought. She loved him dearly.
    You know she keeps his poor grey severed head
    Embalmed; and so will keep it till she dies;
    Weeps over it alone. I have heard such things
    In wild Italian tales. But _this_ was true.
    Had I refused to let her speak with Stukeley
    I feared she would go mad. This letter proves
    That I--and she perhaps--were instruments,
    Of some more terrible chirurgery
    Than either knew."

                       "Ah, when I saw your sign,"
    The bo'sun interjected, "I'd no doubt
    That letter was well worth a cup of ale."

      "Go--paint your bows with hell-fire somewhere else,
    Not at this inn," said Ben, tossing the rogue
    A good French crown. "Pickle yourself in hell."
    And Hart lurched out into the night again,
    Muttering "Thank you, sirs. 'Twas worth all that.
    No doubt at all."

                         "There are some men," said Galen,
    Spreading the letter out on his plump knees,
    "Will heap up wrong on wrong; and, at the last,
    Wonder because the world will not forget
    Just when it suits them, cancel all they owe,
    And, like a mother, hold its arms out wide
    At their first cry. And, sirs, I do believe
    That Stukeley, on that night, had some such wish
    To reconcile himself. What else had passed
    Between the widow and himself I know not;
    But she had lured him on until he thought
    That words and smiles, perhaps a tear or two,
    Might make the widow take the murderer's hand
    In friendship, since it might advantage both.
    Indeed, he came prepared for even more.
    Villains are always fools. A wicked act,
    What is it but a false move in the game,
    A blind man's blunder, a deaf man's reply,
    The wrong drug taken in the dead of night?
    I always pity villains.
                           I mistook
    The avenger for the victim. There she lay
    Panting, that night, her eyes like summer stars
    Her pale gold hair upon the pillows tossed
    Dishevelled, while the fever in her face
    Brought back the lost wild roses of her youth
    For half an hour. Against a breast as pure
    And smooth as any maid's, her soft arms pressed
    A bundle wrapped in a white embroidered cloth.
    She crooned over it as a mother croons
    Over her suckling child. I stood beside her.
    --That was her wish, and mine, while Stukeley stayed.--
    And, over against me, on the other side,
    Stood Stukeley, gnawing his nether lip to find
    She could not, or she would not, speak one word
    In answer to his letter.

                           'Lady Raleigh,
    You wrong me, and you wrong yourself,' he cried,
    'To play like a green girl when great affairs
    Are laid before you. Let me speak with you
    Alone.'

           'But I am all alone,' she said,
    'Far more alone than I have ever been
    In all my life before. This is my doctor.
    He must not leave me.'

                              Then she lured him on,
    Played on his brain as a musician plays
    Upon the lute.
                    'Forgive me, dear Sir Lewis,
    If I am grown too gay for widowhood.
    But I have pondered for a long, long time
    On all these matters. I know the world was right;
    And Spain was right, Sir Lewis. Yes, and you,
    You too, were right; and my poor husband wrong.
    You see I knew his mind so very well.
    I knew his every gesture, every smile.
    I lived with him. I think I died with him.
    It is a strange thing, marriage. For my soul
    (As if myself were present in this flesh)
    Beside him, slept in his grey prison-cell
    On that last dreadful dawn. I heard the throng
    Murmuring round the scaffold far away;
    And, with the smell of sawdust in my nostrils,
    I woke, bewildered as himself, to see
    That tall black-cassocked figure by his bed.
    I heard the words that made him understand:
    _The Body of our Lord--take and eat this!_
    I rolled the small sour flakes beneath my tongue
    With him. I caught, with him, the gleam of tears,
    Far off, on some strange face of sickly dread.
    _The Blood_--and the cold cup was in my hand,
    Cold as an axe-heft washed with waterish red.
    I heard his last poor cry to wife and child.--
    Could any that heard forget it?--_My true God,
    Hold you both in His arms, both in His arms._
    And then--that last poor wish, a thing to raise
    A smile in some. I have smiled at it myself
    A thousand times.
                          "_Give me my pipe_," he said,
    "_My old Winchester clay, with the long stem,
    And half an hour alone. The crowd can wait.
    They have not waited half so long as I._"
    And then, O then, I know what soft blue clouds,
    What wavering rings, fragrant ascending wreaths
    Melted his prison walls to a summer haze,
    Through which I think he saw the little port
    Of Budleigh Salterton, like a sea-bird's nest
    Among the Devon cliffs--the tarry quay
    Whence in his boyhood he had flung a line
    For bass or whiting-pollock. I remembered
    (Had he not told me, on some summer night,
    His arm about my neck, kissing my hair)
    He used to sit there, gazing out to sea;
    Fish, and for what? Not all for what he caught
    And handled; but for rainbow-coloured things,
    The water-drops that jewelled his thin line,
    Flotsam and jetsam of the sunset-clouds;
    While the green water, gurgling through the piles,
    Heaving and sinking, helped him to believe
    The fast-bound quay a galleon plunging out
    Superbly for Cathay. There would he sit
    Listening, a radiant boy, child of the sea,
    Listening to some old seaman's glowing tales,
    His grey eyes rich with pictures--

                                       Then he saw,
    And I with him, that gathering in the West,
    To break the Fleet Invincible. O, I heard
    The trumpets and the neighings and the drums.
    I watched the beacons on a hundred hills.
    I drank that wine of battle from _his_ cup,
    And gloried in it, lying against his heart.
    I sailed with him and saw the unknown worlds!
    The slender ivory towers of old Cathay
    Rose for us over lilac-coloured seas
    That crumbled a sky-blue foam on long shores
    Of shining sand, shores of so clear a glass
    They drew the sunset-clouds into their bosom
    And hung that City of Vision in mid-air
    Girdling it round, as with a moat of sky,
    Hopelessly beautiful. O, yet I heard,
    Heard from his blazoned poops the trumpeters
    Blowing proud calls, while overhead the flag
    Of England floated from white towers of sail--
    And yet, and yet, I knew that he was wrong,
    And soon he knew it, too.

                               I saw the cloud
    Of doubt assail him, in the Bloody Tower,
    When, being withheld from sailing the high seas
    For sixteen years, he spread a prouder sail,
    Took up his pen, and, walled about with stone,
    Began to write--his _History of the World_.
    And emperors came like Lazarus from the grave
    To wear his purple. And the night disgorged
    Its empires, till, O, like the swirl of dust
    Around their marching legions, that dim cloud
    Of doubt closed round him. Was there any man
    So sure of heart and brain as to record
    The simple truth of things himself had seen?
    Then who could plumb that night? The work broke off!
    He knew that he was wrong. I knew it, too!
    Once more that stately structure of his dreams
    Melted like mist. His eagles perished like clouds.
    Death wound a thin horn through the centuries.
    The grave resumed his forlorn emperors.
    His empires crumbled back to a little ash
    Knocked from his pipe.--
    He dropped his pen in homage to the truth.
    The truth? _O, eloquent, just and mighty Death!_

    Then, when he forged, out of one golden thought,
    A key to open his prison; when the King
    Released him for a tale of faërie gold
    Under the tropic palms; when those grey walls
    Melted before his passion; do you think
    The gold that lured the King was quite the same
    As that which Raleigh saw? You know the song:

         "Say to the King," quoth Raleigh,
           "I have a tale to tell him;
             Wealth beyond derision,
               Veils to lift from the sky,
         Seas to sail for England,
           And a little dream to sell him,
             Gold, the gold of a vision
               That angels cannot buy."

    Ah, no! For all the beauty and the pride,
    Raleigh was wrong; but not so wrong, I think,
    As those for whom his kingdoms oversea
    Meant only glittering dust. The fight he waged
    Was not with them. They never worsted him.

    It was _The Destiny_ that brought him home
    Without the Spanish gold.--O, he was wrong,
    But such a wrong, in Gloriana's day,
    Was more than right, was immortality.
    He had just half an hour to put all this
    Into his pipe and smoke it,--

                                   The red fire,
    The red heroic fire that filled his veins
    When the proud flag of England floated out
    Its challenge to the world--all gone to ash?
    What! Was the great red wine that Drake had quaffed
    Vinegar? He must fawn, haul down his flag,
    And count all nations nobler than his own,
    Tear out the lions from the painted shields
    That hung his poop, for fear that he offend
    The pride of Spain? Treason to sack the ships
    Of Spain? The wounds of slaughtered Englishmen
    Cried out--_there is no law beyond the line!_
    Treason to sweep the seas with Francis Drake?
    Treason to fight for England?
                                 If it were so,
    The times had changed and quickly. He had been
    A schoolboy in the morning of the world
    Playing with wooden swords and winning crowns
    Of tinsel; but his comrades had outgrown
    Their morning-game, and gathered round to mock
    His battles in the sunset. Yet he knew
    That all his life had passed in that brief day;
    And he was old, too old to understand
    The smile upon the face of Buckingham,
    The smile on Cobham's face, at that great word
    _England_!
              He knew the solid earth was changed
    To something less than dust among the stars--
    And, O, be sure he knew that he was wrong,
    That gleams would come,
    Gleams of a happier world for younger men,
    That Commonwealth, far off. This was a time
    Of sadder things, destruction of the old
    Before the new was born. At least he knew
    It was his own way that had brought the world
    Thus far, England thus far! How could he change,
    Who had loved England as a man might love
    His mistress, change from year to fickle year?
    For the new years would change, even as the old.
    No--he was wedded to that old first love,
    Crude flesh and blood, and coarse as meat and drink,
    The woman--England; no fine angel-isle,
    Ruled by that male Salome--Buckingham!
    Better the axe than to live on and wage
    These new and silent and more deadly wars
    That play at friendship with our enemies.
    Such times are evil. Not of their own desire
    They lead to good, blind agents of that Hand
    Which now had hewed him down, down to his knees,
    But in a prouder battle than men knew.

    His pipe was out, the guard was at the door.
    Raleigh was not a god. But, when he climbed
    The scaffold, I believe he looked a man.
    And when the axe fell, I believe that God
    Set on his shoulders that immortal head
    Which he desired on earth.

                                  O, he was wrong!
    But when that axe fell, not one shout was raised.
    That mighty throng around that crimson block
    Stood silent--like the hushed black cloud that holds
    The thunder. You might hear the headsman's breath.
    Stillness like that is dangerous, being charged,
    Sometimes, with thought, Sir Lewis! England sleeps!
    What if, one day, the Stewart should be called
    To know that England wakes? What if a shout
    Should thunder-strike Whitehall, and the dogs lift
    Their heads along the fringes of the crowd
    To catch a certain savour that I know,
    The smell of blood and sawdust?--

                                           Ah, Sir Lewis,
    'Tis hard to find one little seed of right
    Among so many wrongs. Raleigh was wrong,
    And yet--it was because he loved his country
    Next to himself, Sir Lewis, by your leave,
    His country butchered him. You did not know
    That I was only third in his affections?
    The night I told him--we were parting then--
    I had begged the last disposal of his body,
    Did he not say, with O, so gentle a smile,
    "_Thou hadst not always the disposal of it
    In life, dear Bess. 'Tis well it should be thine
    In death!_"'

                 'The jest was bitter at such an hour,
    And somewhat coarse in grain,' Stukeley replied.
    'Indeed I thought him kinder.'

                                  'Kinder,' she said,
    Laughing bitterly.

                      Stukeley looked at her.
    She whispered something, and his lewd old eyes
    Fastened upon her own. He knelt by her.
    'Perhaps,' he said, 'your woman's wit has found
    A better way to solve this bitter business.'
    Her head moved on the pillow with little tossings.
    He touched her hand. It leapt quickly away.
    She hugged that strange white bundle to her breast,
    And writhed back, smiling at him, across the bed.

    'Ah, Bess,' he whispered huskily, pressing his lips
    To that warm hollow where her head had lain,
    'There is one way to close the long dispute,
    Keep the estates unbroken in your hands
    And stop all slanderous tongues, one happy way.
    We have some years to live; and why alone?'
    'Alone?' she sighed. 'My husband thought of that.
    He wrote a letter to me long ago,
    When he was first condemned. He said--he said--
    Now let me think--what was it that he said?--
    I had it all by heart. "_Beseech you, Bess,
    Hide not yourself for many days_", he said.'
    'True wisdom that,' quoth Stukeley, 'for the love
    That seeks to chain the living to the dead
    Is but self-love at best!'

                             'And yet,' she said,
    'How his poor heart was torn between two cares,
    Love of himself and care for me, as thus:

    _Love God! Begin to repose yourself on Him!
    Therein you shall find true and lasting riches;
    But all the rest is nothing. When you have tired
    Your thoughts on earthly things, when you have travelled
    Through all the glittering pomps of this proud world
    You shall sit down by Sorrow in the end.
    Begin betimes, and teach your little son
    To serve and fear God also.
    Then God will be a husband unto you,
    And unto him a father; nor can Death
    Bereave you any more. When I am gone,
    No doubt you shall be sought unto by many
    For the world thinks that I was very rich.
    No greater misery can befall you, Bess,
    Than to become a prey, and, afterwards,
    To be despised.'_

                     'Human enough,' said Stukeley,
    'And yet--self-love, self-love!'

                                 'Ah no,' quoth she,
    'You have not heard the end: _God knows, I speak it
    Not to dissuade you_--not to dissuade you, mark--
    _From marriage. That will be the best for you,
    Both in respect of God and of the world._
    Was _that_ self-love, Sir Lewis? Ah, not all.
    And thus he ended: _For his father's sake
    That chose and loved you in his happiest times,
    Remember your poor child! The Everlasting,
    Infinite, powerful, and inscrutable God,
    Keep you and yours, have mercy upon me,
    And teach me to forgive my false accusers_--
    Wrong, even in death, you see. Then--_My true wife,
    Farewell!
    Bless my poor boy! Pray for me! My true God,
    Hold you both in His arms, both in His arms!_
    I know that he was wrong. You did not know,
    Sir Lewis, that he had left me a little child.
    Come closer. You shall see its orphaned face,
    The sad, sad relict of a man that loved
    His country--all that's left to me. Come, look!'
    She beckoned Stukeley nearer. He bent down
    Curiously. Her feverish fingers drew

    The white wrap from the bundle in her arms,
    And, with a smile that would make angels weep,
    She showed him, pressed against her naked breast,
    Terrible as Medusa, the grey flesh
    And shrivelled face, embalmed, the thing that dropped
    Into the headsman's basket, months agone,--
    The head of Raleigh.
                             Half her body lay
    Bare, while she held that grey babe to her heart;
    But Judas hid his face....
    'Living,' she said, 'he was not always mine;
    But--dead--I shall not wean him'--
                                       Then, I too
    Covered my face--I cannot tell you more.
    There was a dreadful silence in that room,
    Silence that, as I know, shattered the brain
    Of Stukeley.--When I dared to raise my head
    Beneath that silent thunder of our God,
    The man had gone--
                          This is his letter, sirs,
    Written from Lundy Island: "_For God's love,
    Tell them it is a cruel thing to say
    That I drink blood. I have no secret sin.
    A thousand pound is not so great a sum;
    And that is all they paid me, every penny.
    Salt water, that is all the drink I taste
    On this rough island. Somebody has taught
    The sea-gulls how to wail around my hut
    All night, like lost souls. And there is a face,
    A dead man's face that laughs in every storm,
    And sleeps in every pool along the coast.
    I thought it was my own, once. But I know
    These actions never, never, on God's earth,
    Will turn out to their credit, who believe
    That I drink blood._"
                         He crumpled up the letter
    And tossed it into the fire.
                                 "Galen," said Ben,
    "I think you are right--that one should pity villains."

       *   *   *   *

    The clock struck twelve. The bells began to peal.
    We drank a cup of sack to the New Year.
    "New songs, new voices, all as fresh as may,"
    Said Ben to Brome, "but I shall never live
    To hear them."

                    All was not so well, indeed,
    With Ben, as hitherto. Age had come upon him.
    He dragged one foot as in paralysis.
    The critics bayed against the old lion, now,
    And called him arrogant. "My brain," he said,
    "Is yet unhurt although, set round with pain,
    It cannot long hold out." He never stooped,
    Never once pandered to that brainless hour.
    His coat was thread-bare. Weeks had passed of late
    Without his voice resounding in our inn.

    "The statues are defiled, the gods dethroned,
    The Ionian movement reigns, not the free soul.
    And, as for me, I have lived too long," he said.
    "Well--I can weave the old threnodies anew."
    And, filling his cup, he murmured, soft and low,
    A new song, breaking on an ancient shore:


    I

    Marlowe is dead, and Greene is in his grave,
      And sweet Will Shakespeare long ago is gone!
    Our Ocean-shepherd sleeps beneath the wave;
    Robin is dead, and Marlowe in his grave.
    Why should I stay to chant an idle stave,
      And in my Mermaid Tavern drink alone?
    For Kit is dead and Greene is in his grave,
      And sweet Will Shakespeare long ago is gone.


    II

    Where is the singer of the Faërie Queen?
      Where are the lyric lips of Astrophel?
    Long, long ago, their quiet graves were green;
    Ay, and the grave, too, of their Faërie Queen!
    And yet their faces, hovering here unseen,
      Call me to taste their new-found oenomel;
    To sup with him who sang the Faërie Queen;
      To drink with him whose name was Astrophel.


    III

    I drink to that great Inn beyond the grave!
      --If there be none, the gods have done us wrong.--
    Ere long I hope to chant a better stave,
    In some great Mermaid Inn beyond the grave;
    And quaff the best of earth that heaven can save,
      Red wine like blood, deep love of friends and song.
    I drink to that great Inn beyond the grave;
      And hope to greet my golden lads ere long.

    He raised his cup and drank in silence. Brome
    Drank with him, too. The bells had ceased to peal.
    Galen shook hands, and bade us all good-night.
    Then Brome, a little wistfully, I thought,
    Looked at his old-time master, and prepared
    To follow.
                  "Good-night--Ben," he said, a pause
    Before he spoke the name. "Good-night! Good-night!
    My dear old Brome," said Ben.
                                      And, at the door,
    Brome whispered to me, "He is lonely now.
    There are not many left of his old friends.
    We all go out--like this--into the night.
    But what a fleet of stars!" he said, and shook
    My hand, and smiled, and pointed to the sky.
    And, when I looked into the room again,
    The lights were very dim, and I believed
    That Ben had fallen asleep. His great grey head
    Was bowed across the table, on his arms.
    Then, all at once, I knew that he was weeping;
    And like a shadow I crept back again,
    And stole into the night.
                                There as I stood
    Under the painted sign, I could have vowed
    That I, too, heard the voices of the dead,
    The voices of his old companions,
    Gathering round him in that lonely room,
    Till all the timbers of the Mermaid Inn
    Trembled above me with their ghostly song:


    I

    Say to the King, quoth Raleigh
      I have a tale to tell him,
        Wealth beyond derision,
          Veils to lift from the sky,
    Seas to sail for England
      And a little dream to sell him,--
        Gold, the gold of a vision,
          That angels cannot buy.


    II

    Fair thro' the walls of his dungeon,
      --What were the stones but a shadow?--
        Streamed the light of the rapture,
          The lure that he followed of old,
    The dream of his old companions,
      The vision of El Dorado,
        The fleet that they never could capture,
          The City of Sunset-gold.


    III

    Yet did they sail the seas
      And, dazed with exceeding wonder,
        Straight through the sunset-glory
          Plunge into the dawn:
    Leaving their home behind them,
      By a road of splendour and thunder,
        They came to their home in amazement
          Simply by sailing on.




NEW POEMS




A WATCHWORD OF THE FLEET

     [_For purposes of recognition at night a small squadron of
     Elizabethan ships, crossing the Atlantic, adopted as a
     watchword the sentence: Before the world--was God._]


    They diced with Death. Their big sea-boots
      Were greased with blood. They swept the seas
    For England; and--we reap the fruits
      Of their heroic deviltries!
    Our creed is in the cold machine,
      The inhuman devildoms of brain,
      The bolt that splits the midnight main,
    Loosed at a lever's touch; the lean
      Torpedo; "Twenty Miles of Power";
    The steel-clad Dreadnoughts' dark array!
      Yet ... we that keep the conning tower
    Are not so strong as they
      Whose watchword we disdain.

    They laughed at odds for England's sake!
      We count, yet cast our strength away.
    One Admiral with the soul of Drake
      Would break the fleets of hell to-day!
    Give us the splendid heavens of youth,
      Give us the banners of deathless flame,
      The ringing watchwords of their fame,
    The faith, the hope, the simple truth!
      Then shall the Deep indeed be swayed
    Through all its boundless breadth and length,
      Nor this proud England lean dismayed
    On twenty miles of strength,
      Or shrink from aught but shame.

    Pull out by night, O leave the shore
      And lighted streets of Plymouth town,
    Pull out into the Deep once more!
      There, in the night of their renown,
    The same great waters roll their gloom
      Around our midget period;
      And the huge decks that Raleigh trod
    Over our petty darkness loom!
      Along the line the cry is passed
    From all their heaven-illumined spars,
      Clear as a bell, from mast to mast,
    It rings against the stars:
      _Before the world--was God._




NEW WARS FOR OLD

     "_Peace with its luxury is the corrupter of Nations._"

     _Any militarist Journal._


    I

    Peace! When have we prayed for peace?
          Over us burns a star
    Bright, beautiful, red for strife!
    Yours are only the drum and the fife
    And the golden braid and the surface of life!
          Ours is the white-hot war!


    II

    Peace? When have we prayed for peace?
          Ours are the weapons of men!
    Time changes the face of the world!
    Therefore your ancient flags are furled,
    And ours are the unseen legions hurled
          Up to the heights again!


    III

    Peace? When have we prayed for peace?
          Is there no wrong to right?
    Wrong crying to God on high
    Here where the weak and the helpless die,
    And the homeless hordes of the city go by,
          The ranks are rallied to-night!


    IV

    Peace? When have we prayed for peace?
          Are ye so dazed with words?
    Earth, heaven, shall pass away
    Ere for your passionless peace we pray!
    Are ye deaf to the trumpets that call us to-day,
          Blind to the blazing swords?




THE PRAYER FOR PEACE

     "_Unless public opinion can rise to the height of discussing
     the substitution of law for force as a great world-movement,
     the American arbitration proposals cannot be carried out._"

                                        _Sir Edward Grey._




    I

    Dare we--though our hope deferred
      Left us faithless long ago--
    Dare we let our hearts be stirred,
      Lift them to the light and _know_,
    Cast away our cynic shields,
    Break the sword that Mockery wields,
    _Know_ that Truth indeed prevails,
    And that Justice holds the scales?
              Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    II

    Dare we know that this great hour,
      Dawning on thy long renown,
    Marks the purpose of thy power,
      Crowns thee with a mightier crown,
    Know that to this purpose climb
    All the blood-red wars of Time?
    If indeed thou _hast_ a goal
    Beaconing to thy warrior soul,
              Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    III

    Dare we know what every age
    Writes with an unerring hand,
    Read the midnight's moving page,
    Read the stars and understand,--
    Out of Chaos ye shall draw
    Linked harmonies of Law,
    Till around the Eternal Sun
    All your peoples move in one?
                Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    IV

    Dare we know that wearied eyes
      Dimmed with dust of every day
    _Can_, once more, desire the skies
    And the glorious upward way?
    Dare we, if the Truth should still
    Vex with doubt our alien will,
    Take it to our Maker's throne,
    Let Him speak with us alone?
                Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!


    V

    _Dare we cast our pride away?
      Dare we tread where Lincoln trod?
    All the Future, by this day,
      Waits to judge us and our God!
    Set the struggling peoples free!
    Crown with Law their Liberty!
    Proud with an immortal pride,
    Kneel we at our Sister's side!
                Britain, kneel!
    Kneel, Imperial Commonweal!_




THE SWORD OF ENGLAND

     (_Written during a European war crisis_)


    Not as one muttering in a spell-bound sleep
      Shall England speak the word;
    Not idly bid the embattled lightnings leap,
      Nor lightly draw the sword!

    Let statesmen grope by night in a blind dream,
      The cold clear morning star
    Should like a trophy in her helmet gleam
      When England sweeps to war!

    Not like a derelict, drunk with surf and spray,
      And drifting down to doom;
    But like the Sun-god calling up the day
      Should England rend that gloom.

    Not as in trance, at some hypnotic call,
      Nor with a doubtful cry;
    But a clear faith, like a banner above us all,
      Rolling from sky to sky.

    She sheds no blood to that vain god of strife
      Whom striplings call "renown";
    She knows that only they who reverence life
      Can nobly lay it down;

    And these will ride from child and home and love,
      Through death and hell that day;
    But O, her faith, her flag, must burn above,
      Her soul must lead the way!




THE DAWN OF PEACE


    Yes--"on our brows we feel the breath
        Of dawn," though in the night we wait!
    An arrow is in the heart of Death,
        A God is at the doors of Fate!
    The spirit that moved upon the Deep
        Is moving through the minds of men:
    The nations feel it in their sleep,
        A change has touched their dreams again.

    Voices, confused, and faint, arise,
        Troubling their hearts from East and West.
    A doubtful light is in their skies,
        A gleam that will not let them rest:
    The dawn, the dawn is on the wing,
        The stir of change on every side,
    Unsignalled as the approach of Spring,
        Invincible as the hawthorn-tide.

    Have ye not heard it, far and nigh,
        The voice of France across the dark,
    And all the Atlantic with one cry
        Beating the shores of Europe?--hark!
    Then--if ye will--uplift your word
        Of cynic wisdom! Once again
    Tell us He came to bring a sword,
        Tell us He lived and died in vain.

    Say that we dream! Our dreams have woven
        Truths that out-face the burning sun:
    The lightnings, that we dreamed, have cloven
        Time, space, and linked all lands in one!
    Dreams! But their swift celestial fingers
        Have knit the world with threads of steel,
    Till no remotest island lingers
        Beyond the world's one Commonweal.

    Tell us that custom, sloth, and fear
        Are strong, then name them "common-sense"!
    Tell us that greed rules everywhere,
        Then dub the lie "experience":
    Year after year, age after age,
        Has handed down, thro' fool and child,
    For earth's divinest heritage
        The dreams whereon old wisdom smiled.

    Dreams are they? But ye cannot stay them,
        Or thrust the dawn back for one hour!
    Truth, Love, and Justice, if ye slay them,
        Return with more than earthly power:
    Strive, if ye will, to seal the fountains
        That send the Spring thro' leaf and spray:
    Drive back the sun from the Eastern mountains,
        Then--bid this mightier movement stay.

    It is the Dawn of Peace! The nations
        From East to West have heard a cry,--
    "Through all earth's blood-red generations
        By hate and slaughter climbed thus high,
    Here--on this height--still to aspire,
        One only path remains untrod,
    One path of love and peace climbs higher!
        Make straight that highway for our God."




THE BRINGERS OF GOOD NEWS


    Like fallen stars the watch-fires gleamed
        Along our menaced age that night!
    Our bivouacked century tossed and dreamed
        Of battle with the approaching light.

    Rumors of change, a sea-like roar,
        Shook the firm earth with doubt and dread:
    The clouds, in rushing legions bore
        Their tattered eagles overhead.

    I saw the muffled sentries rest
        On the dark hills of Time. I saw
    Around them march from East to West
        The stars of the unresting law.

    I knew that in their mighty course
        They brought the dawn, they brought the day;
    And that the unconquerable force
        Of the new years was on the way.

    I heard the feet of that great throng!
        I saw them shine, like hope, afar!
    Their shout, their shout was like a song,
        And O, 'twas not a song of war!

    Yet, as the whole world with their tramp
        Quivered, a signal-lightning spoke,
    A bugle warned our darkling camp,
        And, like a thunder-cloud, it woke.

    Our searchlights raked the world's wide ends.
        O'er the dark hills a grey light crept.
    Down, through the light, that host of friends
        We took for foemen, triumphing swept.

    The old century could not hear their cry,
        How should it hear the song they sang?
    _We bring good news!_ It pierced the sky!
        _We bring good news!_ The welkin rang.

    One shout of triumph and of faith;
        And then--our shattering cannon roared!
    But, over the reeking ranks of death,
        The song rose like a single sword.

    _We bring good news!_ Red flared the guns!
        _We bring good news!_ The sabres flashed!
    And the dark age with its own sons
        In blind and furious battle clashed.

    A swift, a terrible bugle pealed.
      The sulphurous clouds were rolled away.
    Embraced, embraced, on that red field,
      The wounded and the dying lay.

    _We bring good news!_ Blood choked the word,
        --_We knew you not; so dark the night!--
    O father, was I worth your sword?
        O son, O herald of the light!_

    _We bring good news!_--The darkness fills
        Mine eyes!--Nay, the night ebbs away!
    And, over the everlasting hills,
        The great new dawn led on the day.




THE LONELY SHRINE

     (_A few months after the Milton Ter-centenary._)


    I

    The crowd has passed away,
        Faded the feast, and most forget!
    Master, we come with lowly hearts to pay
        Our deeper debt.


    II

    High they upheld the wine,
        And royally, royally drank to thee!
    Loud were their plaudits. Now the lonely shrine
        Accepts our knee.


    III

    All dark and silent now!
        Master, thy few are faithful still,
    And nightly hear thy brooks that warbling flow
        By Siloa's hill.




AT NOON

     (AFTER THE FRENCH OF VERLAINE)


    The sky is blue above the roof,
          So calm, so blue;
    One rustling bough above the roof
          Rocks, the noon through.

    The bell-tower in the sky, aloof,
          Tenderly rings!
    A bird upon the bough, aloof,
          Sorrows and sings.

    My God, my God, and life is here
          So simple and still!
    Far off, the murmuring town I hear
          At the wind's will....

    _What hast thou done, thou, weeping there?
          O quick, the truth!
    What hast thou done, thou, weeping there,
          With thy lost youth?_




TO A FRIEND OF BOYHOOD LOST AT SEA


    O warm blue sky and dazzling sea,
    Where have you hid my friend from me?
        The white-chalk coast, the leagues of surf
    Laugh to the May-light, now as then,
        And violets in the short sweet turf
    Make fragmentary heavens again,
        And sea-born wings of rustling snow
        Pass and re-pass as long ago.

    Old friend, do you remember yet
    The days when secretly we met
        In that old harbor years a-back,
    Where I admired your billowing walk,
        Or in that perilous fishing smack
    What tarry oaths perfumed your talk,
        The sails we set, the ropes we spliced,
        The raw potato that we sliced,

    For mackerel-bait--and how it shines
    Far down, at end of the taut lines!--
        And the great catch we made that day,

    Loading our boat with rainbows, quick
        And quivering, while you smoked your clay
    And I took home your "Deadwood Dick"
        In yellow and red, when day was done
    And you took home my Stevenson?

    Not leagues, as when you sailed the deep,
    But only some frail bars of sleep
        Sever us now! Methinks you still
    Recall, as I, in dreams, the quay,
        The little port below the hill:
    And all the changes of the sea,
        Like some great music, can but roll
        Our lives still nearer to the goal.




OUR LADY OF THE TWILIGHT


    Our Lady of the Twilight
          From out the sunset-lands
    Comes gently stealing o'er the world
          And stretches out her hands,
    Over the blotched and broken wall,
          The blind and foetid lane,
    She stretches out her hands and all
          Is beautiful again.

    No factory chimneys can defile
          The beauty of her dress:
    She stoops down with her heavenly smile
          To heal and love and bless:
    All tortured things, all evil powers,
          All shapes of dark distress
    Are turned to fragrance and to flowers
          Beneath her kind caress.

    Our Lady of the Twilight,
          She melts our prison-bars!
    She makes the sea forget the shore,
          She fills the sky with stars,
    And stooping over wharf and mill,
          Chimney and shed and dome,
    Turns them to fairy palaces,
          Then calls her children home.

    She stoops to bless the stunted tree,
          And from the furrowed plain,
    And from the wrinkled brow she smooths
          The lines of care and pain:
    Hers are the gentle hands and eyes
          And hers the peaceful breath
    That ope, in sunset-softened skies,
          The quiet gates of death.

    _Our Lady of the Twilight,
          She hath such gentle hands,
    So lovely are the gifts she brings
          From out the sunset-lands,
    So bountiful, so merciful
          So sweet of soul is she;
    And over all the world she draws
          Her cloak of charity._




THE HILL-FLOWERS

     "_I will lift up mine eyes to the hills"_


    I

    _Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
    Ere I waken in the city--Life, thy dawn makes all things new!
    And up a fir-clad glen, far from all the haunts of men,
    Up a glen among the mountains, oh my feet are wings again!_

    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
    O mountains of my boyhood, I come again to you,
    By the little path I know, with the sea far below,
    And above, the great cloud-galleons with their sails of rose and snow;

    As of old, when all was young, and the earth a song unsung
    And the heather through the crimson dawn its Eden incense flung
    From the mountain-heights of joy, for a careless-hearted boy,
    And the lavrocks rose like fountain sprays of bliss that ne'er could cloy,

    From their little beds of bloom, from the golden gorse and broom,
    With a song to God the Giver, o'er that waste of wild perfume;
    Blowing from height to height, in a glory of great light,
    While the cottage-clustered valleys held the lilac last of night,

    So, when dawn is in the skies, in a dream, a dream, I rise,
    And I follow my lost boyhood to the heights of Paradise.
    Life, thy dawn makes all things new! Hills of Youth, I come to you,
    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew.


    II

    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew,
    Floats a brother's face to meet me! Is it you? Is it you?
    For the night I leave behind keeps these dazzled eyes still blind!
    But oh, the little hill-flowers, their scent is wise and kind;

    And I shall not lose the way from the darkness to the day,
    While dust can cling as their scent clings to memory for aye;
    And the least link in the chain can recall the whole again,
    And heaven at last resume its far-flung harvests, grain by grain.

    To the hill-flowers clings my dust, and tho' eyeless Death may thrust
    All else into the darkness, in their heaven I put my trust;
    And a dawn shall bid me climb to the little spread of thyme
    Where first I heard the ripple of the fountain-heads of rhyme.

    And a fir-wood that I know, from dawn to sunset-glow,
    Shall whisper to a lonely sea, that swings far, far below.
    Death, thy dawn makes all things new. Hills of Youth, I come to you,
    Moving through the dew, moving through the dew.




THE CAROL OF THE FIR-TREE


    Quoth the Fir-tree, "Orange and vine"
      _Sing 'Nowell, Nowell, Nowell'!_
    "Have their honour: I have mine!"
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "I am kin to the great king's house,"
      _Ring 'Nowell, Nowell, Nowell'!_
    "And Lebanon whispers in my boughs."
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_

    Apple and cherry, pear and plum,
      _Winds of Autumn, sigh 'Nowell_'!
    All the trees like mages come
      _Bending low with 'Gloria'!_
    Holding out on every hand
      _Summer pilgrims to Nowell!_
    Gorgeous gifts from Elfin-land.
      _And the May saith 'Gloria'!_

    Out of the darkness--who shall say
      _Gold and myrrh for this Nowell!_
    How they win their wizard way?
      _Out of the East with 'Gloria'!_
    Men that eat of the sun and dew
      _Angels laugh and sing, 'Nowell.'_
    Call it "fruit," and say it "grew"!
      _Into the West with 'Gloria'!_

    "Leaves that fall," whispered the Fir
      _Through the forest sing 'Nowell'!_
    "I am winter's minister."
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    Summer friends may come and go,
      _Up the mountain sing 'Nowell.'_
    Love abides thro' storm and snow.
      _Down the valley, 'Gloria'!_

    "On my boughs, on mine on mine,"
      _Father and mother, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "All the fruits of the earth shall twine."
      _Bending low with 'Gloria.'_
    "Sword of wood and doll of wax"
      _Little children, sing 'Nowell.'_
    "Swing on the stem was cleft with the axe!"
      _Craftsmen all, a 'Gloria.'_

    "Hear! I have looked on the other side."
      _Out of the East, O sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Because to live this night I died!"
      _Into the West with 'Gloria.'_
    "Hear! In this lighted room I have found"
      _Ye that seek, O sing 'Nowell'!_
    "The spell that worketh underground."
      _Ye that doubt, a 'Gloria.'_

    "I have found it, even I,"
      _Ye that are lowly, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "The secret of this alchemy!"
      _Ye that are poor, a 'Gloria.'_
    "Look, your tinsel turneth to gold."
      _Sing 'Nowell! Nowell! Nowell!'_
    "Your dust to a hand for love to hold!"
      _In Excelsis Gloria._

    "Lay the axe at my young stem now!"
      _Woodman, woodman, sing 'Nowell.'_
    "Set a star on every bough!"
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "Hall and cot shall see me stand,"
      _Rich and poor man, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Giver of gifts from Elfin-land."
      _Oberon, answer 'Gloria.'_

    "Hung by the hilt on your Christmas-tree"
      _Little children, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Your wooden sword is a cross for me."
      _Emperors, a 'Gloria.'_
    "I have found that fabulous stone"
      _Ocean-worthies, cry 'Nowell.'_
    "Which turneth all things into one,"
      _Wise men all, a 'Gloria.'_

    "It is not ruby nor anything"
      _Jeweller, jeweller, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "Fit for the crown of an earthly King:"
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "It is not here! It is not there!"
      _Traveller, rest and cry 'Nowell'!_
    "It is one thing and everywhere!"
      _Heaven and Earth sing 'Gloria.'_

    "It is the earth, the moon, the sun,"
      _Mote in the sunbeam, sing 'Nowell'!_
    "And all the stars that march as one."
      _In Excelsis Gloria!_
    "Here, by the touch of it, I can see"
      _Sing, O Life, a sweet Nowell!_
    "The world's King die on a Christmas-tree."
      _Answer, Death, with 'Gloria.'_

    "Here, not set in a realm apart,"
      _East and West are one 'Nowell'!_
    "Holy Land is in your Heart!"
      _North and South one 'Gloria'!_
    "Death is a birth, birth is a death,"
      _Love is all, O sing 'Nowell'!_
    "And London one with Nazareth."
      _And all the World a 'Gloria.'_

    "And angels over your heart's roof sing"
      _Birds of God, O pour 'Nowell'!_
    "That a poor man's son is the Son of a King!"
      _Out of your heart this 'Gloria'!_
    "Round the world you'll not away"
      _In your own soul, they sing 'Nowell'!_
    "From Holy Land this Christmas Day!"
      _In your own soul, this 'Gloria.'_




LAVENDER


    Lavender, lavender
      That makes your linen sweet;
    The hawker brings his basket
      Down the sooty street:
    The dirty doors and pavements
      Are simmering in the heat:
    He brings a dream to London,
      And drags his weary feet.

    Lavender, lavender,
      From where the bee hums,
    To the loud roar of London,
      With purple dreams he comes,
    From raggèd lanes of wild-flowers
      To raggèd London slums,
    With a basket full of lavender
      And purple dreams he comes.

    Is it nought to you that hear him?
      With the old strange cry
    The weary hawker passes,
      And some will come and buy,
    And some will let him pass away
      And only heave a sigh,
    But most will neither heed nor hear
      When dreams go by.

    _Lavender, lavender!
      His songs were fair and sweet,
    He brought us harvests out of heaven,
      Full sheaves of radiant wheat;
    He brought us keys to Paradise,
      And hawked them thro' the street;
    He brought his dreams to London,
      And dragged his weary feet._

    Lavender, lavender!
      He is gone. The sunset glows;
    But through the brain of London
      The mystic fragrance flows.
    Each foggy cell remembers,
      Each raggèd alley knows,
    The land he left behind him,
      The land to which he goes.

PROEM


Mastered by desire impulsive,
By a mighty inward urging,
I am ready now for singing,
Ready to begin the chanting
Of our nation’s ancient folk-song
Handed down from by-gone ages.
In my mouth the words are melting,
From my lips the tones are gliding,
From my tongue they wish to hasten;
When my willing teeth are parted,
When my ready mouth is opened,
Songs of ancient wit and wisdom
Hasten from me not unwilling.

Golden friend, and dearest brother,
Brother dear of mine in childhood,
Come and sing with me the stories,
Come and chant with me the legends,
Legends of the times forgotten,
Since we now are here together,
Come together from our roamings.
Seldom do we come for singing,
Seldom to the one, the other,
O’er this cold and cruel country,
O’er the poor soil of the Northland.
Let us clasp our hands together
That we thus may best remember.
Join we now in merry singing,
Chant we now the oldest folk-lore,
That the dear ones all may hear them,
That the well-inclined may hear them,
Of this rising generation.
These are words in childhood taught me,
Songs preserved from distant ages,
Legends they that once were taken
From the belt of Wainamoinen,
From the forge of Ilmarinen,
From the sword of Kaukomieli,
From the bow of Youkahainen,
From the pastures of the Northland,
From the meads of Kalevala.
These my dear old father sang me
When at work with knife and hatchet
These my tender mother taught me
When she twirled the flying spindle,
When a child upon the matting
By her feet I rolled and tumbled.

Incantations were not wanting
Over Sampo and o’er Louhi,
Sampo growing old in singing,
Louhi ceasing her enchantment.
In the songs died wise Wipunen,
At the games died Lemminkainen.
There are many other legends,
Incantations that were taught me,
That I found along the wayside,
Gathered in the fragrant copses,
Blown me from the forest branches,
Culled among the plumes of pine-trees,
Scented from the vines and flowers,
Whispered to me as I followed
Flocks in land of honeyed meadows,
Over hillocks green and golden,
After sable-haired Murikki,
And the many-colored Kimmo.
Many runes the cold has told me,
Many lays the rain has brought me,
Other songs the winds have sung me;
Many birds from many forests,
Oft have sung me lays in concord
Waves of sea, and ocean billows,
Music from the many waters,
Music from the whole creation,
Oft have been my guide and master.
Sentences the trees created,
Rolled together into bundles,
Moved them to my ancient dwelling,
On the sledges to my cottage,
Tied them to my garret rafters,
Hung them on my dwelling-portals,
Laid them in a chest of boxes,
Boxes lined with shining copper.
Long they lay within my dwelling
Through the chilling winds of winter,
In my dwelling-place for ages.

Shall I bring these songs together
From the cold and frost collect them?
Shall I bring this nest of boxes,
Keepers of these golden legends,
To the table in my cabin,
Underneath the painted rafters,
In this house renowned and ancient?
Shall I now these boxes open,
Boxes filled with wondrous stories?
Shall I now the end unfasten
Of this ball of ancient wisdom,
These ancestral lays unravel?
Let me sing an old-time legend,
That shall echo forth the praises
Of the beer that I have tasted,
Of the sparkling beer of barley.
Bring to me a foaming goblet
Of the barley of my fathers,
Lest my singing grow too weary,
Singing from the water only.
Bring me too a cup of strong-beer,
It will add to our enchantment,
To the pleasure of the evening,
Northland’s long and dreary evening,
For the beauty of the day-dawn,
For the pleasure of the morning,
The beginning of the new-day.

Often I have heard them chanting,
Often I have heard them singing,
That the nights come to us singly,
That the Moon beams on us singly,
That the Sun shines on us singly;
Singly also, Wainamoinen,
The renowned and wise enchanter,
Born from everlasting Ether
Of his mother, Ether’s daughter.




RUNE I.
BIRTH OF WAINAMOINEN.


In primeval times, a maiden,
Beauteous Daughter of the Ether,
Passed for ages her existence
In the great expanse of heaven,
O’er the prairies yet enfolded.
Wearisome the maiden growing,
Her existence sad and hopeless,
Thus alone to live for ages
In the infinite expanses
Of the air above the sea-foam,
In the far outstretching spaces,
In a solitude of ether,
She descended to the ocean,
Waves her coach, and waves her pillow.
Thereupon the rising storm-wind
Flying from the East in fierceness,
Whips the ocean into surges,
Strikes the stars with sprays of ocean
Till the waves are white with fervor.
To and fro they toss the maiden,
Storm-encircled, hapless maiden;
With her sport the rolling billows,
With her play the storm-wind forces,
On the blue back of the waters;
On the white-wreathed waves of ocean,
Play the forces of the salt-sea,
With the lone and helpless maiden;
Till at last in full conception,
Union now of force and beauty,
Sink the storm-winds into slumber;
Overburdened now the maiden
Cannot rise above the surface;
Seven hundred years she wandered,
Ages nine of man’s existence,
Swam the ocean hither, thither,
Could not rise above the waters,
Conscious only of her travail;
Seven hundred years she labored
Ere her first-born was delivered.
Thus she swam as water-mother,
Toward the east, and also southward,
Toward the west, and also northward;
Swam the sea in all directions,
Frightened at the strife of storm-winds,
Swam in travail, swam unceasing,
Ere her first-born was delivered.

Then began she gently weeping,
Spake these measures, heavy-hearted:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!
Woe is me, in this my travail!
Into what have I now fallen?
Woe is me, that I unhappy,
Left my home in subtle ether,
Came to dwell amid the sea-foam,
To be tossed by rolling billows,
To be rocked by winds and waters,
On the far outstretching waters,
In the salt-sea’s vast expanses,
Knowing only pain and trouble!
Better far for me, O Ukko!
Were I maiden in the Ether,
Than within these ocean-spaces,
To become a water-mother!
All this life is cold and dreary,
Painful here is every motion,
As I linger in the waters,
As I wander through the ocean.
Ukko, thou O God, up yonder,
Thou the ruler of the heavens,
Come thou hither, thou art needed,
Come thou hither, I implore thee,
To deliver me from trouble,
To deliver me in travail.
Come I pray thee, hither hasten,
Hasten more that thou art needed,
Haste and help this helpless maiden!”

When she ceased her supplications,
Scarce a moment onward passes,
Ere a beauteous duck descending,
Hastens toward the water-mother,
Comes a-flying hither, thither,
Seeks herself a place for nesting.
Flies she eastward, flies she westward,
Circles northward, circles southward,
Cannot find a grassy hillock,
Not the smallest bit of verdure;
Cannot find a spot protected,
Cannot find a place befitting,
Where to make her nest in safety.
Flying slowly, looking round her,
She descries no place for resting,
Thinking loud and long debating,
And her words are such as follow:
“Build I in the winds my dwelling,
On the floods my place of nesting?
Surely would the winds destroy it,
Far away the waves would wash it.”

Then the daughter of the Ether,
Now the hapless water-mother,
Raised her shoulders out of water,
Raised her knees above the ocean,
That the duck might build her dwelling,
Build her nesting-place in safety.
Thereupon the duck in beauty,
Flying slowly, looking round her,
Spies the shoulders of the maiden,
Sees the knees of Ether’s daughter,
Now the hapless water-mother,
Thinks them to be grassy hillocks,
On the blue back of the ocean.
Thence she flies and hovers slowly,
Lightly on the knee she settles,
Finds a nesting-place befitting,
Where to lay her eggs in safety.
Here she builds her humble dwelling,
Lays her eggs within, at pleasure,
Six, the golden eggs she lays there,
Then a seventh, an egg of iron;
Sits upon her eggs to hatch them,
Quickly warms them on the knee-cap
Of the hapless water-mother;
Hatches one day, then a second,
Then a third day sits and hatches.
Warmer grows the water round her,
Warmer is her bed in ocean,
While her knee with fire is kindled,
And her shoulders too are burning,
Fire in every vein is coursing.
Quick the maiden moves her shoulders,
Shakes her members in succession,
Shakes the nest from its foundation,
And the eggs fall into ocean,
Dash in pieces on the bottom
Of the deep and boundless waters.
In the sand they do not perish,
Not the pieces in the ocean;
But transformed, in wondrous beauty
All the fragments come together
Forming pieces two in number,
One the upper, one the lower,
Equal to the one, the other.
From one half the egg, the lower,
Grows the nether vault of Terra:
From the upper half remaining,
Grows the upper vault of Heaven;
From the white part come the moonbeams,
From the yellow part the sunshine,
From the motley part the starlight,
From the dark part grows the cloudage;
And the days speed onward swiftly,
Quickly do the years fly over,
From the shining of the new sun
From the lighting of the full moon.

Still the daughter of the Ether,
Swims the sea as water-mother,
With the floods outstretched before her,
And behind her sky and ocean.
Finally about the ninth year,
In the summer of the tenth year,
Lifts her head above the surface,
Lifts her forehead from the waters,
And begins at last her workings,
Now commences her creations,
On the azure water-ridges,
On the mighty waste before her.
Where her hand she turned in water,
There arose a fertile hillock;
Wheresoe’er her foot she rested,
There she made a hole for fishes;
Where she dived beneath the waters,
Fell the many deeps of ocean;
Where upon her side she turned her,
There the level banks have risen;
Where her head was pointed landward,
There appeared wide bays and inlets;
When from shore she swam a distance,
And upon her back she rested,
There the rocks she made and fashioned,
And the hidden reefs created,
Where the ships are wrecked so often,
Where so many lives have perished.

Thus created were the islands,
Rocks were fastened in the ocean,
Pillars of the sky were planted,
Fields and forests were created,
Checkered stones of many colors,
Gleaming in the silver sunlight,
All the rocks stood well established;
But the singer, Wainamoinen,
Had not yet beheld the sunshine,
Had not seen the golden moonlight,
Still remaining undelivered.

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Lingering within his dungeon
Thirty summers altogether,
And of winters, also thirty,
Peaceful on the waste of waters,
On the broad-sea’s yielding bosom,
Well reflected, long considered,
How unborn to live and flourish
In the spaces wrapped in darkness,
In uncomfortable limits,
Where he had not seen the moonlight,
Had not seen the silver sunshine.
Thereupon these words he uttered,
Let himself be heard in this wise:
“Take, O Moon, I pray thee, take me,
Take me, thou, O Sun above me,
Take me, thou, O Bear of heaven,
From this dark and dreary prison,
From these unbefitting portals,
From this narrow place of resting,
From this dark and gloomy dwelling,
Hence to wander from the ocean,
Hence to walk upon the islands,
On the dry land walk and wander,
Like an ancient hero wander,
Walk in open air and breathe it,
Thus to see the moon at evening,
Thus to see the silver sunlight,
Thus to see the Bear in heaven,
That the stars I may consider.”

Since the Moon refused to free him,
And the Sun would not deliver,
Nor the Great Bear give assistance,
His existence growing weary,
And his life but an annoyance,
Bursts he then the outer portals
Of his dark and dismal fortress;
With his strong, but unnamed finger,
Opens he the lock resisting;
With the toes upon his left foot,
With the fingers of his right hand,
Creeps he through the yielding portals
To the threshold of his dwelling;
On his knees across the threshold,
Throws himself head foremost, forward
Plunges into deeps of ocean,
Plunges hither, plunges thither,
Turning with his hands the water;
Swims he northward, swims he southward,
Swims he eastward, swims he westward,
Studying his new surroundings.

Thus our hero reached the water,
Rested five years in the ocean,
Six long years, and even seven years,
Till the autumn of the eighth year,
When at last he leaves the waters,
Stops upon a promontory,
On a coast bereft of verdure;
On his knees he leaves the ocean,
On the land he plants his right foot,
On the solid ground his left foot,
Quickly turns his hands about him,
Stands erect to see the sunshine,
Stands to see the golden moonlight,
That he may behold the Great Bear,
That he may the stars consider.
Thus our hero, Wainamoinen,
Thus the wonderful enchanter
Was delivered from his mother,
Ilmatar, the Ether’s daughter.




RUNE II.
WAINAMOINEN’S SOWING.


Then arose old Wainamoinen,
With his feet upon the island,
On the island washed by ocean,
Broad expanse devoid of verdure;
There remained he many summers,
There he lived as many winters,
On the island vast and vacant,
Well considered, long reflected,
Who for him should sow the island,
Who for him the seeds should scatter;
Thought at last of Pellerwoinen,
First-born of the plains and prairies,
When a slender boy, called Sampsa,
Who should sow the vacant island,
Who the forest seeds should scatter.
Pellerwoinen, thus consenting,
Sows with diligence the island,
Seeds upon the lands he scatters,
Seeds in every swamp and lowland,
Forest seeds upon the loose earth,
On the firm soil sows the acorns,
Fir-trees sows he on the mountains,
Pine-trees also on the hill-tops,
Many shrubs in every valley,
Birches sows he in the marshes,
In the loose soil sows the alders,
In the lowlands sows the lindens,
In the moist earth sows the willow,
Mountain-ash in virgin places,
On the banks of streams the hawthorn,
Junipers in hilly regions;
This the work of Pellerwoinen,
Slender Sampsa, in his childhood.
Soon the fertile seeds were sprouting,
Soon the forest trees were growing,
Soon appeared the tops of fir-trees,
And the pines were far outspreading;
Birches rose from all the marshes,
In the loose soil grew the alders,
In the mellow soil the lindens;
Junipers were also growing,
Junipers with clustered berries,
Berries on the hawthorn branches.

Now the hero, Wainamoinen,
Stands aloft to look about him,
How the Sampsa-seeds are growing,
How the crop of Pellerwoinen;
Sees the young trees thickly spreading,
Sees the forest rise in beauty;
But the oak-tree has not sprouted,
Tree of heaven is not growing,
Still within the acorn sleeping,
Its own happiness enjoying.
Then he waited three nights longer,
And as many days he waited,
Waited till a week had vanished,
Then again the work examined;
But the oak-tree was not growing,
Had not left her acorn-dwelling.

Wainamoinen, ancient hero,
Spies four maidens in the distance,
Water-brides, he spies a fifth-one,
On the soft and sandy sea-shore,
In the dewy grass and flowers,
On a point extending seaward,
Near the forests of the island.
Some were mowing, some were raking,
Raking what was mown together,
In a windrow on the meadow.

From the ocean rose a giant,
Mighty Tursas, tall and hardy,
Pressed compactly all the grasses,
That the maidens had been raking,
When a fire within them kindles,
And the flames shot up to heaven,
Till the windrows burned to ashes,
Only ashes now remaining
Of the grasses raked together.
In the ashes of the windrows,
Tender leaves the giant places,
In the leaves he plants an acorn,
From the acorn, quickly sprouting,
Grows the oak-tree, tall and stately,
From the ground enriched by ashes,
Newly raked by water-maidens;
Spread the oak-tree’s many branches,
Rounds itself a broad corona,
Raises it above the storm-clouds;
Far it stretches out its branches,
Stops the white-clouds in their courses,
With its branches hides the sunlight,
With its many leaves, the moonbeams,
And the starlight dies in heaven.

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Thought awhile, and well considered,
How to kill the mighty oak-tree,
First created for his pleasure,
How to fell the tree majestic,
How to lop its hundred branches.
Sad the lives of man and hero,
Sad the homes of ocean-dwellers,
If the sun shines not upon them,
If the moonlight does not cheer them!
Is there not some mighty hero,
Was there never born a giant,
That can fell the mighty oak-tree,
That can lop its hundred branches?
Wainamoinen, deeply thinking,
Spake these words soliloquizing:
“Kapé, daughter of the Ether,
Ancient mother of my being,
Luonnotar, my nurse and helper,
Loan to me the water-forces,
Great the powers of the waters;
Loan to me the strength of oceans,
To upset this mighty oak-tree,
To uproot this tree of evil,
That again may shine the sunlight,
That the moon once more may glimmer.”

Straightway rose a form from ocean,
Rose a hero from the waters,
Nor belonged he to the largest,
Nor belonged he to the smallest,
Long was he as man’s forefinger,
Taller than the hand of woman;
On his head a cap of copper,
Boots upon his feet were copper,
Gloves upon his hands were copper,
And its stripes were copper-colored,
Belt around him made of copper,
Hatchet in his belt was copper;
And the handle of his hatchet
Was as long as hand of woman,
Of a finger’s breadth the blade was.
Then the trusty Wainamoinen
Thought awhile and well considered,
And his measures are as follow:
“Art thou, sir, divine or human?
Which of these thou only knowest;
Tell me what thy name and station.
Very like a man thou lookest,
Hast the bearing of a hero,
Though the length of man’s first finger,
Scarce as tall as hoof of reindeer.”

Then again spake Wainamoinen
To the form from out the ocean:
“Verily I think thee human,
Of the race of pigmy-heroes,
Might as well be dead or dying,
Fit for nothing but to perish.”

Answered thus the pigmy-hero,
Spake the small one from the ocean
To the valiant Wainamoinen:
“Truly am I god and hero,
From the tribes that rule the ocean;
Come I here to fell the oak-tree,
Lop its branches with my hatchet.”

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Answers thus the sea-born hero:
“Never hast thou force sufficient,
Not to thee has strength been given,
To uproot this mighty oak-tree,
To upset this thing of evil,
Nor to lop its hundred branches.”

Scarcely had he finished speaking,
Scarcely had he moved his eyelids,
Ere the pigmy full unfolding,
Quick becomes a mighty giant.
With one step he leaves the ocean,
Plants himself, a mighty hero,
On the forest-fields surrounding;
With his head the clouds he pierces,
To his knees his beard extending,
And his locks fall to his ankles;
Far apart appear his eyeballs,
Far apart his feet are stationed,
Farther still his mighty shoulders.
Now begins his axe to sharpen,
Quickly to an edge he whets it,
Using six hard blocks of sandstone,
And of softer whetstones, seven.
Straightway to the oak-tree turning,
Thither stalks the mighty giant,
In his raiment long and roomy,
Flapping in the winds of heaven;
With his second step he totters
On the land of darker color;
With his third stop firmly planted,
Reaches he the oak-tree’s branches,
Strikes the trunk with sharpened hatchet,
With one mighty swing he strikes it,
With a second blow he cuts it;
As his blade descends the third time,
From his axe the sparks fly upward,
From the oak-tree fire outshooting;
Ere the axe descends a fourth time,
Yields the oak with hundred branches,
Shaking earth and heaven in falling.
Eastward far the trunk extending,
Far to westward flew the tree-tops,
To the South the leaves were scattered,
To the North its hundred branches.
Whosoe’er a branch has taken,
Has obtained eternal welfare;
Who secures himself a tree-top,
He has gained the master magic;
Who the foliage has gathered,
Has delight that never ceases.
Of the chips some had been scattered,
Scattered also many splinters,
On the blue back of the ocean,
Of the ocean smooth and mirrored,
Rocked there by the winds and waters,
Like a boat upon the billows;
Storm-winds blew them to the Northland,
Some the ocean currents carried.

Northland’s fair and slender maiden,
Washing on the shore a head-dress,
Beating on the rocks her garments,
Rinsing there her silken raiment,
In the waters of Pohyola,
There beheld the chips and splinters,
Carried by the winds and waters.
In a bag the chips she gathered,
Took them to the ancient court-yard,
There to make enchanted arrows,
Arrows for the great magician,
There to shape them into weapons,
Weapons for the skilful archer,
Since the mighty oak has fallen,
Now has lost its hundred branches,
That the North may see the sunshine,
See the gentle gleam of moonlight,
That the clouds may keep their courses,
May extend the vault of heaven
Over every lake and river,
O’er the banks of every island.

Groves arose in varied beauty,
Beautifully grew the forests,
And again, the vines and flowers.
Birds again sang in the tree-tops,
Noisily the merry thrushes,
And the cuckoos in the birch-trees;
On the mountains grew the berries,
Golden flowers in the meadows,
And the herbs of many colors,
Many kinds of vegetation;
But the barley is not growing.

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Goes away and well considers,
By the borders of the waters,
On the ocean’s sandy margin,
Finds six seeds of golden barley,
Even seven ripened kernels,
On the shore of upper Northland,
In the sand upon the sea-shore,
Hides them in his trusty pouches,
Fashioned from the skin of squirrel,
Some were made from skin of marten;
Hastens forth the seeds to scatter,
Quickly sows the barley kernels,
On the brinks of Kalew-waters,
On the Osma-hills and lowlands.

Hark! the titmouse wildly crying,
From the aspen, words as follow:
“Osma’s barley will not flourish,
Not the barley of Wainola,
If the soil be not made ready,
If the forest be not levelled,
And the branches burned to ashes.”

Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
Made himself an axe for chopping,
Then began to clear the forest,
Then began the trees to level,
Felled the trees of all descriptions,
Only left the birch-tree standing
For the birds a place of resting,
Where might sing the sweet-voiced cuckoo,
Sacred bird in sacred branches.
Down from heaven came the eagle,
Through the air he came a-flying,
That he might this thing consider;
And he spake the words that follow:
“Wherefore, ancient Wainamoinen,
Hast thou left the slender birch-tree,
Left the birch-tree only standing?”
Wainamoinen thus made answer:
“Therefore is the birch left standing,
That the birds may nest within it,
That the eagle there may rest him,
There may sing the sacred cuckoo.”
Spake the eagle, thus replying:
“Good indeed, thy hero-judgment,
That the birch-tree thou hast left us,
Left the sacred birch-tree standing,
As a resting-place for eagles,
And for birds of every feather,
Even I may rest upon it.”
Quickly then this bird of heaven,
Kindled fire among the branches;
Soon the flames are fanned by north-winds,
And the east-winds lend their forces,
Burn the trees of all descriptions,
Burn them all to dust and ashes,
Only is the birch left standing.

Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
Brings his magic grains of barley,
Brings he forth his seven seed-grains,
Brings them from his trusty pouches,
Fashioned from the skin of squirrel,
Some were made from skin of marten.
Thence to sow his seeds he hastens,
Hastes the barley-grains to scatter,
Speaks unto himself these measures:
“I the seeds of life am sowing,
Sowing through my open fingers,
From the hand of my Creator,
In this soil enriched with ashes,
In this soil to sprout and flourish.
Ancient mother, thou that livest
Far below the earth and ocean,
Mother of the fields and forests,
Bring the rich soil to producing,
Bring the seed-grains to the sprouting,
That the barley well may flourish.
Never will the earth unaided,
Yield the ripe nutritious barley;
Never will her force be wanting,
If the givers give assistance,
If the givers grace the sowing,
Grace the daughters of creation.
Rise, O earth, from out thy slumber,
From the slumber-land of ages,
Let the barley-grains be sprouting,
Let the blades themselves be starting,
Let the verdant stalks be rising,
Let the ears themselves be growing,
And a hundredfold producing,
From my plowing and my sowing,
From my skilled and honest labor.
Ukko, thou O God, up yonder,
Thou O Father of the heavens,
Thou that livest high in Ether,
Curbest all the clouds of heaven,
Holdest in the air thy counsel,
Holdest in the clouds good counsel,
From the East dispatch a cloudlet,
From the North-east send a rain-cloud,
From the West another send us,
From the North-west, still another,
Quickly from the South a warm-cloud,
That the rain may fall from heaven,
That the clouds may drop their honey,
That the ears may fill and ripen,
That the barley-fields may rustle.”

Thereupon benignant Ukko,
Ukko, father of the heavens,
Held his counsel in the cloud-space,
Held good counsel in the Ether;
From the East, he sent a cloudlet,
From the North-east, sent a rain-cloud,
From the West another sent he,
From the North-west, still another,
Quickly from the South a warm-cloud;
Joined in seams the clouds together,
Sewed together all their edges,
Grasped the cloud, and hurled it earthward.
Quick the rain-cloud drops her honey,
Quick the rain-drops fall from heaven,
That the ears may quickly ripen,
That the barley crop may rustle.
Straightway grow the seeds of barley,
From the germ the blade unfolding,
Richly colored ears arising,
From the rich soil of the fallow,
From the work of Wainamoinen.

Here a few days pass unnoted
And as many nights fly over.
When the seventh day had journeyed,
On the morning of the eighth day,
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
Went to view his crop of barley,
How his plowing, how his sowing,
How his labors were resulting;
Found his crop of barley growing,
Found the blades were triple-knotted,
And the ears he found six-sided.

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Turned his face, and looked about him,
Lo! there comes a spring-time cuckoo,
Spying out the slender birch-tree,
Rests upon it, sweetly singing:
“Wherefore is the silver birch-tree
Left unharmed of all the forest?”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Therefore I have left the birch-tree,
Left the birch-tree only growing,
Home for thee for joyful singing.
Call thou here, O sweet-voiced cuckoo,
Sing thou here from throat of velvet,
Sing thou here with voice of silver,
Sing the cuckoo’s golden flute-notes;
Call at morning, call at evening,
Call within the hour of noontide,
For the better growth of forests,
For the ripening of the barley,
For the richness of, the Northland,
For the joy of Kalevala.”




RUNE III.
WAINAMOINEN AND YOUKAHAINEN.


Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Passed his years in full contentment,
On the meadows of Wainola,
On the plains of Kalevala,
Singing ever wondrous legends,
Songs of ancient wit and wisdom,
Chanting one day, then a second,
Singing in the dusk of evening,
Singing till the dawn of morning,
Now the tales of old-time heroes,
Tales of ages long forgotten,
Now the legends of creation,
Once familiar to the children,
By our children sung no longer,
Sung in part by many heroes,
In these mournful days of evil,
Evil days our race befallen.
Far and wide the story travelled,
Far away men spread the knowledge
Of the chanting of the hero,
Of the song of Wainamoinen;
To the South were heard the echoes,
All of Northland heard the story.

Far away in dismal Northland,
Lived the singer, Youkahainen,
Lapland’s young and reckless minstrel.
Once upon a time when feasting,
Dining with his friends and fellows,
Came upon his ears the story,
That there lived a sweeter singer,
On the meadows of Wainola,
On the plains of Kalevala,
Better skilled in chanting legends,
Better skilled than Youkahainen,
Better than the one that taught him.

Straightway then the bard grew angry,
Envy rose within his bosom,
Envy of this Wainamoinen,
Famed to be a sweeter singer;
Hastes he angry to his mother,
To his mother, full of wisdom,
Vows that he will southward hasten,
Hie him southward and betake him
To the dwellings of Wainola,
To the cabins of the Northland,
There as bard to vie in battle,
With the famous Wainamoinen.

“Nay,” replies the anxious father,
“Do not go to Kalevala.”

“Nay,” replies the fearful mother,
“Go not hence to Wainamoinen,
There with him to offer battle;
He will charm thee with his singing
Will bewitch thee in his anger,
He will drive thee back dishonored,
Sink thee in the fatal snow-drift,
Turn to ice thy pliant fingers,
Turn to ice thy feet and ankles.”
These the words of Youkahainen:
“Good the judgement of a father,
Better still, a mother’s counsel,
Best of all one’s own decision.
I will go and face the minstrel,
Challenge him to sing in contest,
Challenge him as bard to battle,
Sing to him my sweet-toned measures,
Chant to him my oldest legends,
Chant to him my garnered wisdom,
That this best of boasted singers,
That this famous bard of Suomi,
Shall be worsted in the contest,
Shall become a hapless minstrel;
By my songs shall I transform him,
That his feet shall be as flint-stone,
And as oak his nether raiment;
And this famous, best of singers,
Thus bewitched, shall carry ever,
In his heart a stony burden,
On his shoulder bow of marble,
On his hand a flint-stone gauntlet,
On his brow a stony visor.”

Then the wizard, Youkahainen,
Heeding not advice paternal,
Heeding not his mother’s counsel,
Leads his courser from his stable,
Fire outstreaming from his nostrils,
From his hoofs, the sparks outshooting,
Hitches to his sledge, the fleet-foot,
To his golden sledge, the courser,
Mounts impetuous his snow-sledge,
Leaps upon the hindmost cross-bench,
Strikes his courser with his birch-whip,
With his birch-whip, pearl-enamelled.
Instantly the prancing racer
Springs away upon his journey;
On he, restless, plunges northward,
All day long he onward gallops,
All the next day, onward, onward,
So the third from morn till evening,
Till the third day twilight brings him
To the meadows of Wainola,
To the plains of Kalevala.

As it happened, Wainamoinen,
Wainamoinen, the magician,
Rode that sunset on the highway,
Silently for pleasure driving
Down Wainola’s peaceful meadows,
O’er the plains of Kalevala.

Youkahainen, young and fiery,
Urging still his foaming courser,
Dashes down upon the singer,
Does not turn aside in meeting,
Meeting thus in full collision;
Shafts are driven tight together,
Hames and collars wedged and tangled,
Tangled are the reins and traces.
Thus perforce they make a stand-still,
Thus remain and well consider;
Water drips from hame and collar,
Vapors rise from both their horses.
Speaks the minstrel, Wainamoinen:
“Who art thou, and whence? Thou comest
Driving like a stupid stripling,
Careless, dashing down upon me.
Thou hast ruined shafts and traces;
And the collar of my racer
Thou hast shattered into ruin,
And my golden sleigh is broken,
Box and runners dashed to pieces.”

Youkahainen then make answer,
Spake at last the words that follow:
“I am youthful Youkahainen,
But make answer first, who thou art,
Whence thou comest, where thou goest,
From what lowly tribe descended?”

Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
Answered thus the youthful minstrel:
“If thou art but Youkahainen,
Thou shouldst give me all the highway;
I am many years thy senior.”

Then the boastful Youkahainen
Spake again to Wainamoinen:
“Young or ancient, little matter,
Little consequence the age is;
He that higher stands in wisdom,
He whose knowledge is the greater,
He that is the sweeter singer,
He alone shall keep the highway,
And the other take the roadside.
Art thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Famous sorcerer and minstrel?
Let us then begin our singing,
Let us sing our ancient legends,
Let us chant our garnered wisdom,
That the one may hear the other,
That the one may judge the other,
In a war of wizard sayings.”

Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
Thus replied in modest accents:
“What I know is very little,
Hardly is it worth the singing,
Neither is my singing wondrous:
All my days I have resided
In the cold and dreary Northland,
In a desert land enchanted,
In my cottage home for ages;
All the songs that I have gathered,
Are the cuckoo’s simple measures,
Some of these I may remember;
But since thou perforce demandest,
I accept thy boastful challenge.
Tell me now, my golden youngster,
What thou knowest more than others,
Open now thy store of wisdom.”

Thus made answer Youkahainen,
Lapland’s young and fiery minstrel:
“Know I many bits of learning,
This I know in perfect clearness:
Every roof must have a chimney,
Every fire-place have a hearth-stone;
Lives of seal are free and merry,
Merry is the life of walrus,
Feeding on incautious salmon,
Daily eating perch and whiting;
Whitings live in quiet shallows,
Salmon love the level bottoms;
Spawns the pike in coldest weather,
And defies the storms of winter.
Slowly perches swim in Autumn,
Wry-backed, hunting deeper water,
Spawn in shallows in the summer,
Bounding on the shore of ocean.
Should this wisdom seem too little,
I can tell thee other matters,
Sing thee other wizard sayings:
All the Northmen plow with reindeer,
Mother-horses plow the Southland,
Inner Lapland plows with oxen;
All the trees on Pisa-mountain,
Know I well in all their grandeur;
On the Horna-rock are fir-trees,
Fir-trees growing tall and slender;
Slender grow the trees on mountains.
Three, the water-falls in number,
Three in number, inland oceans,
Three in number, lofty mountains,
Shooting to the vault of heaven.
Hallapyora’s near to Yaemen,
Katrakoski in Karyala;
Imatra, the falling water,
Tumbles, roaring, into Wuoksi.”
Then the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Women’s tales and children’s wisdom
Do not please a bearded hero,
Hero, old enough for wedlock;
Tell the story of creation,
Tell me of the world’s beginning,
Tell me of the creatures in it,
And philosophize a little.”

Then the youthful Youkahainen
Thus replied to Wainamoinen:
“Know I well the titmouse-fountains,
Pretty birdling is the titmouse;
And the viper, green, a serpent;
Whitings live in brackish waters;
Perches swim in every river;
Iron rusts, and rusting weakens;
Bitter is the taste of umber;
Boiling water is malicious;
Fire is ever full of danger;
First physician, the Creator;
Remedy the oldest, water;
Magic is the child of sea-foam;
God the first and best adviser;
Waters gush from every mountain;
Fire descended first from heaven;
Iron from the rust was fashioned;
Copper from the rocks created;
Marshes are of lands the oldest;
First of all the trees, the willow;
Fir-trees were the first of houses;
Hollowed stones the first of kettles.”

Now the ancient Wainamoinen
Thus addresses Youkahainen:
“Canst thou give me now some wisdom,
Is this nonsense all thou knowest?”
Youkahainen thus made answer:
“I can tell thee still a trifle,
Tell thee of the times primeval,
When I plowed the salt-sea’s bosom,
When I raked the sea-girt islands,
When I dug the salmon-grottoes,
Hollowed out the deepest caverns,
When I all the lakes created,
When I heaped the mountains round them,
When I piled the rocks about them.
I was present as a hero,
Sixth of wise and ancient heroes,
Seventh of all primeval heroes,
When the heavens were created,
When were formed the ether-spaces,
When the sky was crystal-pillared,
When was arched the beauteous rainbow,
When the Moon was placed in orbit,
When the silver Sun was planted,
When the Bear was firmly stationed,
And with stars the heavens were sprinkled.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Thou art surely prince of liars,
Lord of all the host of liars;
Never wert thou in existence,
Surely wert thou never present,
When was plowed the salt-sea’s bosom,
When were raked the sea-girt islands,
When were dug the salmon-grottoes,
When were hollowed out the caverns,
When the lakes were all created,
When were heaped the mountains round them,
When the rocks were piled about them.
Thou wert never seen or heard of
When the earth was first created,
When were made the ether-spaces,
When the air was crystal-pillared,
When the Moon was placed in orbit,
When the silver Sun was planted,
When the Bear was firmly stationed,
When the skies with stars were sprinkled.”

Then in anger Youkahainen
Answered ancient Wainamoinen:
“Then, sir, since I fail in wisdom,
With the sword I offer battle;
Come thou, famous bard and minstrel,
Thou the ancient wonder-singer,
Let us try our strength with broadswords,
Let our blades be fully tested.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Not thy sword and not thy wisdom,
Not thy prudence, nor thy cunning,
Do I fear a single moment.
Let who may accept thy challenge,
Not with thee, a puny braggart,
Not with one so vain and paltry,
Will I ever measure broadswords.”

Then the youthful Youkahainen,
Mouth awry and visage sneering,
Shook his golden locks and answered:
“Whoso fears his blade to measure,
Fears to test his strength at broadswords,
Into wild-boar of the forest,
Swine at heart and swine in visage,
Singing I will thus transform him;
I will hurl such hero-cowards,
This one hither, that one thither,
Stamp him in the mire and bedding,
In the rubbish of the stable.”

Angry then grew Wainamoinen,
Wrathful waxed, and fiercely frowning,
Self-composed he broke his silence,
And began his wondrous singing.
Sang he not the tales of childhood,
Children’s nonsense, wit of women,
Sang he rather bearded heroes,
That the children never heard of,
That the boys and maidens knew not,
Known but half by bride and bridegroom,
Known in part by many heroes,
In these mournful days of evil,
Evil times our race befallen.
Grandly sang wise Wainamoinen,
Till the copper-bearing mountains,
And the flinty rocks and ledges
Heard his magic tones and trembled;
Mountain cliffs were torn to pieces,
All the ocean heaved and tumbled;
And the distant hills re-echoed.
Lo! the boastful Youkahainen
Is transfixed in silent wonder,
And his sledge with golden trimmings
Floats like brushwood on the billows;
Sings his braces into reed-grass,
Sings his reins to twigs of willow,
And to shrubs his golden cross-bench.
Lo! his birch-whip, pearl-enameled,
Floats a reed upon the border;
Lo! his steed with golden forehead,
Stands a statue on the waters;
Hames and traces are as fir-boughs,
And his collar, straw and sea-grass.
Still the minstrel sings enchantment,
Sings his sword with golden handle,
Sings it into gleam of lightning,
Hangs it in the sky above him;
Sings his cross-bow, gaily painted,
To a rainbow o’er the ocean;
Sings his quick and feathered arrows
Into hawks and screaming eagles;
Sings his dog with bended muzzle,
Into block of stone beside him;
Sings his cap from off his forehead,
Sings it into wreaths of vapor;
From his hands he sings his gauntlets
Into rushes on the waters;
Sings his vesture, purple-colored,
Into white clouds in the heavens;
Sings his girdle, set with jewels,
Into twinkling stars around him;
And alas! for Youkahainen,
Sings him into deeps of quick-sand;
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper,
In his torture, sinks the wizard,
To his belt in mud and water.
Now it was that Youkahainen
Comprehended but too clearly
What his folly, what the end was,
Of the journey he had ventured,
Vainly he had undertaken
For the glory of a contest
With the grand, old Wainamoinen.

When at last young Youkahainen,
Pohyola’s old and sorry stripling,
Strives his best to move his right foot,
But alas! the foot obeys not;
When he strives to move his left foot,
Lo! he finds it turned to flint-stone.

Thereupon sad Youkahainen,
In the deeps of desperation,
And in earnest supplication,
Thus addresses Wainamoinen:
“O thou wise and worthy minstrel,
Thou the only true magician,
Cease I pray thee thine enchantment,
Only turn away thy magic,
Let me leave this slough of horror,
Loose me from this stony prison,
Free me from this killing torment,
I will pay a golden ransom.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“What the ransom thou wilt give me
If I cease from mine enchantment,
If I turn away my magic,
Lift thee from thy slough of horror,
Loose thee from thy stony prison,
Free thee from thy killing torment?”
Answered youthful Youkahainen:
“Have at home two magic cross-bows,
Pair of bows of wondrous power,
One so light a child can bend it,
Only strength can bend the other,
Take of these the one that pleases.”
Then the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Do not wish thy magic cross-bows,
Have a few of such already,
Thine to me are worse than useless;
I have bows in great abundance,
Bows on every nail and rafter,
Bows that laugh at all the hunters,
Bows that go themselves a-hunting.”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Sang alas! poor Youkahainen
Deeper into mud and water,
Deeper in the slough of torment.
Youkahainen thus made answer:
“Have at home two magic shallops,
Beautiful the boats and wondrous;
One rides light upon the ocean,
One is made for heavy burdens;
Take of these the one that pleases.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Do not wish thy magic shallops,
Have enough of such already;
All my bays are full of shallops,
All my shores are lined with shallops,
Some before the winds are sailors,
Some were built to sail against them.”

Still the minstrel of Wainola
Sings again poor Youkahainen
Deeper, deeper into torment,
Into quicksand to his girdle,
Till the Lapland bard in anguish
Speaks again to Wainamoinen:
“Have at home two magic stallions,
One a racer, fleet as lightning,
One was born for heavy burdens;
Take of these the one that pleases.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Neither do I wish thy stallions,
Do not need thy hawk-limbed stallions,
Have enough of these already;
Magic stallions swarm my stables,
Eating corn at every manger,
Broad of back to hold the water,
Water on each croup in lakelets.”

Still the bard of Kalevala
Sings the hapless Lapland minstrel
Deeper, deeper into torment,
To his shoulders into water.
Spake again young Youkahainen:
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Thou the only true magician,
Cease I pray thee thine enchantment,
Only turn away thy magic,
I will give thee gold abundant,
Countless stores of shining silver;
From the wars my father brought it,
Brought it from the hard-fought battles.”
Spake the wise, old Wainamoinen:
“For thy gold I have no longing,
Neither do I wish thy silver,
Have enough of each already;
Gold abundant fills my chambers,
On each nail hang bags of silver,
Gold that glitters in the sunshine,
Silver shining in the moonlight.”

Sank the braggart, Youkahainen,
Deeper in his slough of torment,
To his chin in mud and water,
Ever praying, thus beseeching:
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Greatest of the old magicians,
Lift me from this pit of horror,
From this prison-house of torture;
I will give thee all my corn-fields,
Give thee all my corn in garners,
Thus my hapless life to ransom,
Thus to gain eternal freedom.”
Wainamoinen thus made answer:
“Take thy corn to other markets,
Give thy garners to the needy;
I have corn in great abundance,
Fields have I in every quarter,
Corn in all my fields is growing;
One’s own fields are always richer,
One’s own grain is much the sweeter.”

Lapland’s young and reckless minstrel,
Sorrow-laden, thus enchanted,
Deeper sinks in mud and water,
Fear-enchained and full of anguish,
In the mire, his beard bedrabbled,
Mouth once boastful filled with sea-weed,
In the grass his teeth entangled,
Youkahainen thus beseeches:
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Wisest of the wisdom-singers,
Cease at last thine incantations,
Only turn away thy magic,
And my former life restore me,
Lift me from this stifling torment,
Free mine eyes from sand and water,
I will give thee sister, Aino,
Fairest daughter of my mother,
Bride of thine to be forever,
Bride of thine to do thy pleasure,
Sweep the rooms within thy cottage,
Keep thy dwelling-place in order,
Rinse for thee the golden platters,
Spread thy couch with finest linens,
For thy bed, weave golden covers,
Bake for thee the honey-biscuit.”

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Finds at last the wished-for ransom,
Lapland’s young and fairest daughter,
Sister dear of Youkahainen;
Happy he, that he has won him,
In his age a beauteous maiden,
Bride of his to be forever,
Pride and joy of Kalevala.
Now the happy Wainamoinen,
Sits upon the rock of gladness,
Joyful on the rock of music,
Sings a little, sings and ceases,
Sings again, and sings a third time,
Thus to break the spell of magic,
Thus to lessen the enchantment,
Thus the potent charm to banish.
As the magic spell is broken,
Youkahainen, sad, but wiser,
Drags his feet from out the quicksand,
Lifts his beard from out the water,
From the rocks leads forth his courser,
Brings his sledge back from the rushes,
Calls his whip back from the ocean,
Sets his golden sledge in order,
Throws himself upon the cross-bench,
Snaps his whip and hies him homeward,
Hastens homeward, heavy-hearted,
Sad indeed to meet his mother,
Aino’s mother, gray and aged.
Careless thus he hastens homeward,
Nears his home with noise and bustle,
Reckless drives against the pent-house,
Breaks the shafts against the portals,
Breaks his handsome sledge in pieces.

Then his mother, quickly guessing,
Would have chided him for rashness,
But the father interrupted:
“Wherefore dost thou break thy snow-sledge,
Wherefore dash thy thills in fragments,
Wherefore comest home so strangely,
Why this rude and wild behavior?”

Now alas! poor Youkahainen,
Cap awry upon his forehead,
Falls to weeping, broken-hearted,
Head depressed and mind dejected,
Eyes and lips expressing sadness,
Answers not his anxious father.

Then the mother quickly asked him,
Sought to find his cause for sorrow:
“Tell me, first-born, why thou weepest,
Why thou weepest, heavy-hearted,
Why thy mind is so dejected,
Why thine eyes express such sadness.”
Youkahainen then made answer:
“Golden mother, ever faithful,
Cause there is to me sufficient,
Cause enough in what has happened,
Bitter cause for this my sorrow,
Cause for bitter tears and murmurs:
All my days will pass unhappy,
Since, O mother of my being,
I have promised beauteous Aino,
Aino, thy beloved daughter,
Aino, my devoted sister,
To decrepit Wainamoinen,
Bride to be to him forever,
Roof above him, prop beneath him,
Fair companion at his fire-side.”

Joyful then arose the mother,
Clapped her hands in glee together,
Thus addressing Youkahainen:
“Weep no more, my son beloved,
Thou hast naught to cause thy weeping,
Hast no reason for thy sorrow,
Often I this hope have cherished;
Many years have I been praying
That this mighty bard and hero,
Wise and valiant Wainamoinen,
Spouse should be to beauteous Aino,
Son-in-law to me, her mother.”

But the fair and lovely maiden,
Sister dear of Youkahainen,
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,
On the threshold wept and lingered,
Wept all day and all the night long,
Wept a second, then a third day,
Wept because a bitter sorrow
On her youthful heart had fallen.
Then the gray-haired mother asked her:
“Why this weeping, lovely Aino?
Thou hast found a noble suitor,
Thou wilt rule his spacious dwelling,
At his window sit and rest thee,
Rinse betimes his golden platters,
Walk a queen within his dwelling.”
Thus replied the tearful Aino:
“Mother dear, and all-forgiving,
Cause enough for this my sorrow,
Cause enough for bitter weeping:
I must loose my sunny tresses,
Tresses beautiful and golden,
Cannot deck my hair with jewels,
Cannot bind my head with ribbons,
All to be hereafter hidden
Underneath the linen bonnet
That the wife must wear forever;
Weep at morning, weep at evening,
Weep alas! for waning beauty,
Childhood vanished, youth departed,
Silver sunshine, golden moonlight,
Hope and pleasure of my childhood,
Taken from me now forever,
And so soon to be forgotten
At the tool-bench of my brother,
At the window of my sister,
In the cottage of my father.”

Spake again the gray-haired mother
To her wailing daughter Aino:
“Cease thy sorrow, foolish maiden,
By thy tears thou art ungrateful,
Reason none for thy repining,
Not the slightest cause for weeping;
Everywhere the silver sunshine
Falls as bright on other households;
Not alone the moonlight glimmers
Through thy father’s open windows,
On the work-bench of thy brother;
Flowers bloom in every meadow,
Berries grow on every mountain;
Thou canst go thyself and find them,
All the day long go and find them;
Not alone thy brother’s meadows
Grow the beauteous vines and flowers;
Not alone thy father’s mountains
Yield the ripe, nutritious berries;
Flowers bloom in other meadows,
Berries grow on other mountains,
There as here, my lovely Aino.”




RUNE IV.
THE FATE OF AINO.


When the night had passed, the maiden,
Sister fair of Youkahainen,
Hastened early to the forest,
Birchen shoots for brooms to gather,
Went to gather birchen tassels;
Bound a bundle for her father,
Bound a birch-broom for her mother,
Silken tassels for her sister.
Straightway then she hastened homeward,
By a foot-path left the forest;
As she neared the woodland border,
Lo! the ancient Wainamoinen,
Quickly spying out the maiden,
As she left the birchen woodland,
Trimly dressed in costly raiment,
And the minstrel thus addressed her:
“Aino, beauty of the Northland,
Wear not, lovely maid, for others,
Only wear for me, sweet maiden,
Golden cross upon thy bosom,
Shining pearls upon thy shoulders;
Bind for me thine auburn tresses,
Wear for me thy golden braidlets.”
Thus the maiden quickly answered:
“Not for thee and not for others,
Hang I from my neck the crosslet,
Deck my hair with silken ribbons;
Need no more the many trinkets
Brought to me by ship or shallop;
Sooner wear the simplest raiment,
Feed upon the barley bread-crust,
Dwell forever with my mother
In the cabin with my father.”

Then she threw the gold cross from her,
Tore the jewels from her fingers,
Quickly loosed her shining necklace,
Quick untied her silken ribbons,
Cast them all away indignant
Into forest ferns and flowers.
Thereupon the maiden, Aino,
Hastened to her mother’s cottage.

At the window sat her father
Whittling on an oaken ax-helve:
“Wherefore weepest, beauteous Aino,
Aino, my beloved daughter?”

“Cause enough for weeping, father,
Good the reasons for my mourning,
This, the reason for my weeping,
This, the cause of all my sorrow:
From my breast I tore the crosslet,
From my belt, the clasp of copper,
From my waist, the belt of silver,
Golden was my pretty crosslet.”

Near the door-way sat her brother,
Carving out a birchen ox-bow:
“Why art weeping, lovely Aino,
Aino, my devoted sister?”

“Cause enough for weeping, brother,
Good the reasons for my mourning:
Therefore come I as thou seest,
Rings no longer on my fingers,
On my neck no pretty necklace;
Golden were the rings thou gavest,
And the necklace, pearls and silver!”

On the threshold sat her sister,
Weaving her a golden girdle:
“Why art weeping, beauteous Aino,
Aino, my beloved sister?”

“Cause enough for weeping, sister,
Good the reasons for my sorrow:
Therefore come I as thou seest,
On my head no scarlet fillet,
In my hair no braids of silver,
On mine arms no purple ribbons,
Round my neck no shining necklace,
On my breast no golden crosslet,
In mine ears no golden ear-rings.”

Near the door-way of the dairy,
Skimming cream, sat Aino’s mother.
“Why art weeping, lovely Aino,
Aino, my devoted daughter?”
Thus the sobbing maiden answered:
“Loving mother, all-forgiving,
Cause enough for this my weeping,
Good the reasons for my sorrow,
Therefore do I weep, dear mother:
I have been within the forest,
Brooms to bind and shoots to gather,
There to pluck some birchen tassels;
Bound a bundle for my father,
Bound a second for my mother,
Bound a third one for my brother,
For my sister silken tassels.
Straightway then I hastened homeward,
By a foot-path left the forest;
As I reached the woodland border
Spake Osmoinen from the cornfield,
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
‘Wear not, beauteous maid, for others,
Only wear for me, sweet maiden,
On thy breast a golden crosslet,
Shining pearls upon thy shoulders,
Bind for me thine auburn tresses,
Weave for me thy silver braidlets.’
Then I threw the gold-cross from me,
Tore the jewels from my fingers,
Quickly loosed my shining necklace,
Quick untied my silken ribbons,
Cast them all away indignant,
Into forest ferns and flowers.
Then I thus addressed the singer:
‘Not for thee and not for others,
Hang I from my neck the crosslet,
Deck my hair with silken ribbons;
Need no more the many trinkets,
Brought to me by ship and shallop;
Sooner wear the simplest raiment,
Feed upon the barley bread-crust,
Dwell forever with my mother
In the cabin with my father.’”

Thus the gray-haired mother answered
Aino, her beloved daughter:
“Weep no more, my lovely maiden,
Waste no more of thy sweet young-life;
One year eat thou my sweet butter,
It will make thee strong and ruddy;
Eat another year fresh bacon,
It will make thee tall and queenly;
Eat a third year only dainties,
It will make thee fair and lovely.
Now make haste to yonder hill-top,
To the store-house on the mountain,
Open there the large compartment,
Thou will find it filled with boxes,
Chests and cases, trunks and boxes;
Open thou the box, the largest,
Lift away the gaudy cover,
Thou will find six golden girdles,
Seven rainbow-tinted dresses,
Woven by the Moon’s fair daughters,
Fashioned by the Sun’s sweet virgins.
In my young years once I wandered,
As a maiden on the mountains,
In the happy days of childhood,
Hunting berries in the coppice;
There by chance I heard the daughters
Of the Moon as they were weaving;
There I also heard the daughters
Of the Sun as they were spinning
On the red rims of the cloudlets,
O’er the blue edge of the forest,
On the border of the pine-wood,
On a high and distant mountain.
I approached them, drawing nearer,
Stole myself within their hearing,
Then began I to entreat them,
Thus besought them, gently pleading:
‘Give thy silver, Moon’s fair daughters,
To a poor, but worthy maiden;
Give thy gold, O Sun’s sweet virgins,
To this maiden, young and needy.’
Thereupon the Moon’s fair daughters
Gave me silver from their coffers;
And the Sun’s sweet shining virgins
Gave me gold from their abundance,
Gold to deck my throbbing temples,
For my hair the shining silver.
Then I hastened joyful homeward,
Richly laden with my treasures,
Happy to my mother’s cottage;
Wore them one day, than a second,
Then a third day also wore them,
Took the gold then from my temples,
From my hair I took the silver,
Careful laid them in their boxes,
Many seasons have they lain there,
Have not seen them since my childhood.
Deck thy brow with silken ribbon,
Trim with gold thy throbbing temples,
And thy neck with pearly necklace,
Hang the gold-cross on thy bosom,
Robe thyself in pure, white linen
Spun from flax of finest fiber;
Wear withal the richest short-frock,
Fasten it with golden girdle;
On thy feet, put silken stockings,
With the shoes of finest leather;
Deck thy hair with golden braidlets,
Bind it well with threads of silver;
Trim with rings thy fairy fingers,
And thy hands with dainty ruffles;
Come bedecked then to thy chamber,
Thus return to this thy household,
To the greeting of thy kindred,
To the joy of all that know thee,
Flushed thy cheeks as ruddy berries,
Coming as thy father’s sunbeam,
Walking beautiful and queenly,
Far more beautiful than moonlight.”

Thus she spake to weeping Aino,
Thus the mother to her daughter;
But the maiden, little hearing,
Does not heed her mother’s wishes;
Straightway hastens to the court-yard,
There to weep in bitter sorrow,
All alone to weep in anguish.

Waiting long the wailing Aino
Thus at last soliloquizes:
“Unto what can I now liken
Happy homes and joys of fortune?
Like the waters in the river,
Like the waves in yonder lakelet,
Like the crystal waters flowing.
Unto what, the biting sorrow
Of the child of cold misfortune?
Like the spirit of the sea-duck,
Like the icicle in winter,
Water in the well imprisoned.
Often roamed my mind in childhood,
When a maiden free and merry,
Happily through fen and fallow,
Gamboled on the meads with lambkins,
Lingered with the ferns and flowers,
Knowing neither pain nor trouble;
Now my mind is filled with sorrow,
Wanders though the bog and stubble,
Wanders weary through the brambles,
Roams throughout the dismal forest,
Till my life is filled with darkness,
And my spirit white with anguish.
Better had it been for Aino
Had she never seen the sunlight,
Or if born had died an infant,
Had not lived to be a maiden
In these days of sin and sorrow,
Underneath a star so luckless.
Better had it been for Aino,
Had she died upon the eighth day
After seven nights had vanished;
Needed then but little linen,
Needed but a little coffin,
And a grave of smallest measure;
Mother would have mourned a little,
Father too perhaps a trifle,
Sister would have wept the day through,
Brother might have shed a tear-drop,
Thus had ended all the mourning.”

Thus poor Aino wept and murmured,
Wept one day, and then a second,
Wept a third from morn till even,
When again her mother asked her:
“Why this weeping, fairest daughter,
Darling daughter, why this grieving?”
Thus the tearful maiden answered:
“Therefore do I weep and sorrow,
Wretched maiden all my life long,
Since poor Aino, thou hast given,
Since thy daughter thou hast promised
To the aged Wainamoinen,
Comfort to his years declining,
Prop to stay him when he totters,
In the storm a roof above him,
In his home a cloak around him;
Better far if thou hadst sent me
Far below the salt-sea surges,
To become the whiting’s sister,
And the friend of perch and salmon;
Better far to ride the billows,
Swim the sea-foam as a mermaid,
And the friend of nimble fishes,
Than to be an old man’s solace,
Prop to stay him when he totters,
Hand to aid him when he trembles,
Arm to guide him when he falters,
Strength to give him when he weakens;
Better be the whiting’s sister
And the friend of perch and salmon,
Than an old man’s slave and darling.”

Ending thus she left her mother,
Straightway hastened to the mountain,
To the store-house on the summit,
Opened there the box the largest,
From the box six lids she lifted,
Found therein six golden girdles,
Silken dresses seven in number.
Choosing such as pleased her fancy,
She adorned herself as bidden,
Robed herself to look her fairest,
Gold upon her throbbing temples,
In her hair the shining silver,
On her shoulders purple ribbons,
Band of blue around her forehead,
Golden cross, and rings, and jewels,
Fitting ornaments to beauty.

Now she leaves her many treasures,
Leaves the store-house on the mountain,
Filled with gold and silver trinkets,
Wanders over field and meadow,
Over stone-fields waste and barren,
Wanders on through fen and forest,
Through the forest vast and cheerless,
Wanders hither, wanders thither,
Singing careless as she wanders,
This her mournful song and echo:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!
Woe to Aino, broken-hearted!
Torture racks my heart and temples,
Yet the sting would not be deeper,
Nor the pain and anguish greater,
If beneath this weight of sorrow,
In my saddened heart’s dejection,
I should yield my life forever,
Now unhappy, I should perish!
Lo! the time has come for Aino
From this cruel world to hasten,
To the kingdom of Tuoni,
To the realm of the departed,
To the isle of the hereafter.
Weep no more for me, O Father,
Mother dear, withhold thy censure,
Lovely sister, dry thine eyelids,
Do not mourn me, dearest brother,
When I sink beneath the sea-foam,
Make my home in salmon-grottoes,
Make my bed in crystal waters,
Water-ferns my couch and pillow.”

All day long poor Aino wandered,
All the next day, sad and weary,
So the third from morn till evening,
Till the cruel night enwrapped her,
As she reached the sandy margin,
Reached the cold and dismal sea-shore,
Sat upon the rock of sorrow,
Sat alone in cold and darkness,
Listened only to the music
Of the winds and rolling billows,
Singing all the dirge of Aino.
All that night the weary maiden
Wept and wandered on the border
Through the sand and sea-washed pebbles.

As the day dawns, looking round her,
She beholds three water-maidens,
On a headland jutting seaward,
Water-maidens four in number,
Sitting on the wave-lashed ledges,
Swimming now upon the billows,
Now upon the rocks reposing.
Quick the weeping maiden, Aino,
Hastens there to join the mermaids,
Fairy maidens of the waters.
Weeping Aino, now disrobing,
Lays aside with care her garments,
Hangs her silk robes on the alders,
Drops her gold-cross on the sea-shore,
On the aspen hangs her ribbons,
On the rocks her silken stockings,
On the grass her shoes of deer-skin,
In the sand her shining necklace,
With her rings and other jewels.

Out at sea a goodly distance,
Stood a rock of rainbow colors,
Glittering in silver sunlight.
Toward it springs the hapless maiden,
Thither swims the lovely Aino,
Up the standing-stone has clambered,
Wishing there to rest a moment,
Rest upon the rock of beauty;
When upon a sudden swaying
To and fro among the billows,
With a crash and roar of waters
Falls the stone of many colors,
Falls upon the very bottom
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea.
With the stone of rainbow colors,
Falls the weeping maiden, Aino,
Clinging to its craggy edges,
Sinking far below the surface,
To the bottom of the blue-sea.
Thus the weeping maiden vanished,
Thus poor Aino sank and perished,
Singing as the stone descended,
Chanting thus as she departed:
“Once to swim I sought the sea-side,
There to sport among the billows;
With the stone of many colors
Sank poor Aino to the bottom
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,
Like a pretty son-bird perished.
Never come a-fishing, father,
To the borders of these waters,
Never during all thy life-time,
As thou lovest daughter Aino.

“Mother dear, I sought the sea-side,
There to sport among the billows;
With the stone of many colors,
Sank poor Aino to the bottom
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,
Like a pretty song-bird perished.
Never mix thy bread, dear mother,
With the blue-sea’s foam and waters,
Never during all thy life-time,
As thou lovest daughter Aino.

“Brother dear, I sought the sea-side,
There to sport among the billows;
With the stone of many colors
Sank poor Aino to the bottom
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,
Like a pretty song-bird perished.
Never bring thy prancing war-horse,
Never bring thy royal racer,
Never bring thy steeds to water,
To the borders of the blue-sea,
Never during all thy life-time,
As thou lovest sister Aino.

“Sister dear, I sought the sea-side,
There to sport among the billows;
With the stone of many colors
Sank poor Aino to the bottom
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,
Like a pretty song-bird perished.
Never come to lave thine eyelids
In this rolling wave and sea-foam,
Never during all thy life-time,
As thou lovest sister Aino.
All the waters in the blue-sea
Shall be blood of Aino’s body;
All the fish that swim these waters
Shall be Aino’s flesh forever;
All the willows on the sea-side
Shall be Aino’s ribs hereafter;
All the sea-grass on the margin
Will have grown from Aino’s tresses.”

Thus at last the maiden vanished,
Thus the lovely Aino perished.
Who will tell the cruel story,
Who will bear the evil tidings
To the cottage of her mother,
Once the home of lovely Aino?
Will the bear repeat the story,
Tell the tidings to her mother?
Nay, the bear must not be herald,
He would slay the herds of cattle.
Who then tell the cruel story,
Who will bear the evil tidings
To the cottage of her father,
Once the home of lovely Aino?
Shall the wolf repeat the story,
Tell the sad news to her father?
Nay, the wolf must not be herald,
He would eat the gentle lambkins.

Who then tell the cruel story,
Who will bear the evil tidings.
To the cottage of her sister?
Will the fox repeat the story
Tell the tidings to her sister?
Nay, the fox must not be herald,
He would eat the ducks and chickens.

Who then tell the cruel story,
Who will bear the evil tidings
To the cottage of her brother,
Once the home of lovely Aino?
Shall the hare repeat the story,
Bear the sad news to her brother?
Yea, the hare shall be the herald,
Tell to all the cruel story.
Thus the harmless hare makes answer:
“I will bear the evil tidings
To the former home of Aino,
Tell the story to her kindred.”

Swiftly flew the long-eared herald,
Like the winds he hastened onward,
Galloped swift as flight of eagles;
Neck awry he bounded forward
Till he gained the wished-for cottage,
Once the home of lovely Aino.
Silent was the home, and vacant;
So he hastened to the bath-house,
Found therein a group of maidens,
Working each upon a birch-broom.
Sat the hare upon the threshold,
And the maidens thus addressed him:
“Hie there, Long-legs, or we’ll roast thee,
Hie there, Big-eye, or we’ll stew thee,
Roast thee for our lady’s breakfast,
Stew thee for our master’s dinner,
Make of thee a meal for Aino,
And her brother, Youkahainen!
Better therefore thou shouldst gallop
To thy burrow in the mountains,
Than be roasted for our dinners.”

Then the haughty hare made answer,
Chanting thus the fate of Aino:
“Think ye not I journey hither,
To be roasted in the skillet,
To be stewed in yonder kettle;
Let fell Lempo fill thy tables!
I have come with evil tidings,
Come to tell the cruel story
Of the flight and death of Aino,
Sister dear of Youkahainen.
With the stone of many colors
Sank poor Aino to the bottom
Of the deep and boundless waters,
Like a pretty song-bird perished;
Hung her ribbons on the aspen,
Left her gold-cross on the sea-shore,
Silken robes upon the alders,
On the rocks her silken stockings,
On the grass her shoes of deer-skin,
In the sand her shining necklace,
In the sand her rings and jewels;
In the waves, the lovely Aino,
Sleeping on the very bottom
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,
In the caverns of the salmon,
There to be the whiting’s sister
And the friend of nimble fishes.”

Sadly weeps the ancient mother
From her blue-eyes bitter tear-drops,
As in sad and wailing measures,
Broken-hearted thus she answers:
“Listen, all ye mothers, listen,
Learn from me a tale of wisdom:
Never urge unwilling daughters
From the dwellings of their fathers,
To the bridegrooms that they love not,
Not as I, inhuman mother,
Drove away my lovely Aino,
Fairest daughter of the Northland.”

Sadly weeps the gray-haired mother,
And the tears that fall are bitter,
Flowing down her wrinkled visage,
Till they trickle on her bosom;
Then across her heaving bosom,
Till they reach her garment’s border;
Then adown her silken stockings,
Till they touch her shoes of deer-skin;
Then beneath her shoes of deer-skin,
Flowing on and flowing ever,
Part to earth as its possession,
Part to water as its portion.
As the tear-drops fall and mingle,
Form they streamlets three in number,
And their source, the mother’s eyelids,
Streamlets formed from pearly tear-drops,
Flowing on like little rivers,
And each streamlet larger growing,
Soon becomes a rushing torrent;
In each rushing, roaring torrent,
There a cataract is foaming,
Foaming in the silver sunlight;
From the cataract’s commotion
Rise three pillared rocks in grandeur;
From each rock, upon the summit,
Grow three hillocks clothed in verdure;
From each hillock, speckled birches,
Three in number, struggle skyward;
On the summit of each birch-tree
Sits a golden cuckoo calling,
And the three sing, all in concord:
“Love! O Love!” the first one calleth;
Sings the second, “Suitor! Suitor!”
And the third one calls and echoes,
“Consolation! Consolation!”
He that “Love! O Love!” is calling,
Calls three moons and calls unceasing,
For the love-rejecting maiden
Sleeping in the deep sea-castles.
He that “Suitor! Suitor!” singeth,
Sings six moons and sings unceasing
For the suitor that forever
Sings and sues without a hearing.
He that sadly sings and echoes,
“Consolation! Consolation!”
Sings unceasing all his life long
For the broken-hearted mother
That must mourn and weep forever.

When the lone and wretched mother
Heard the sacred cuckoo singing,
Spake she thus, and sorely weeping:
“When I hear the cuckoo calling,
Then my heart is filled with sorrow;
Tears unlock my heavy eyelids,
Flow adown my furrowed visage,
Tears as large as silver sea pearls;
Older grow my wearied elbows,
Weaker ply my aged fingers,
Wearily, in all its members,
Does my body shake in palsy,
When I hear the cuckoo singing,
Hear the sacred cuckoo calling.”




RUNE V.
WAINAVOINEN’S LAMENTATION.


Far and wide the tidings travelled,
Far away men heard the story
Of the flight and death of Aino,
Sister dear of Youkahainen,
Fairest daughter of creation.

Wainamoinen, brave and truthful,
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,
Wept at morning, wept at evening,
Sleepless, wept the dreary night long,
That his Aino had departed,
That the maiden thus had vanished,
Thus had sunk upon the bottom
Of the blue-sea, deep and boundless.

Filled with grief, the ancient singer,
Wainamoinen of the Northland,
Heavy-hearted, sorely weeping,
Hastened to the restless waters,
This the suitor’s prayer and question:
“Tell, Untamo, tell me, dreamer,
Tell me, Indolence, thy visions,
Where the water-gods may linger,
Where may rest Wellamo’s maidens?”

Then Untamo thus made answer,
Lazily he told his dreamings:
“Over there, the mermaid-dwellings,
Yonder live Wellamo’s maidens,
On the headland robed in verdure,
On the forest-covered island,
In the deep, pellucid waters,
On the purple-colored sea-shore;
Yonder is the home of sea-maids,
There the maidens of Wellamo,
Live there in their sea-side chambers,
Rest within their water-caverns,
On the rocks of rainbow colors,
On the juttings of the sea-cliffs.”

Straightway hastens Wainamoinen
To a boat-house on the sea-shore,
Looks with care upon the fish-hooks,
And the lines he well considers;
Lines, and hooks, and poles, and fish-nets,
Places in a boat of copper,
Then begins he swiftly rowing
To the forest-covered island,
To the point enrobed in verdure,
To the purple-colored headland,
Where the sea-nymphs live and linger.
Hardly does he reach the island
Ere the minstrel starts to angle;
Far away he throws his fish-hook,
Trolls it quickly through the waters,
Turning on a copper swivel
Dangling from a silver fish-line,
Golden is the hook he uses.

Now he tries his silken fish-net,
Angles long, and angles longer,
Angles one day, then a second,
In the morning, in the evening,
Angles at the hour of noontide,
Many days and nights he angles,
Till at last, one sunny morning,
Strikes a fish of magic powers,
Plays like salmon on his fish-line,
Lashing waves across the waters,
Till at length the fish exhausted
Falls a victim to the angler,
Safely landed in the bottom
Of the hero’s boat of copper.

Wainamoinen, proudly viewing,
Speaks these words in wonder guessing:
“This the fairest of all sea-fish,
Never have I seen its equal,
Smoother surely than the salmon,
Brighter-spotted than the trout is,
Grayer than the pike of Suomi,
Has less fins than any female,
Not the fins of any male fish,
Not the stripes of sea-born maidens,
Not the belt of any mermaid,
Not the ears of any song-bird,
Somewhat like our Northland salmon
From the blue-sea’s deepest caverns.”

In his belt the ancient hero
Wore a knife insheathed with silver;
From its case he drew the fish-knife,
Thus to carve the fish in pieces,
Dress the nameless fish for roasting,
Make of it a dainty breakfast,
Make of it a meal at noon-day,
Make for him a toothsome supper,
Make the later meal at evening.

Straightway as the fish he touches,
Touches with his knife of silver,
Quick it leaps upon the waters,
Dives beneath the sea’s smooth surface,
From the boat with copper bottom,
From the skiff of Wainamoinen.

In the waves at goodly distance,
Quickly from the sea it rises
On the sixth and seventh billows,
Lifts its head above the waters,
Out of reach of fishing-tackle,
Then addresses Wainamoinen,
Chiding thus the ancient hero:
“Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Do not think that I came hither
To be fished for as a salmon,
Only to be chopped in pieces,
Dressed and eaten like a whiting
Make for thee a dainty breakfast,
Make for thee a meal at midday,
Make for thee a toothsome supper,
Make the fourth meal of the Northland.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Wherefore didst thou then come hither,
If it be not for my dinner?”
Thus the nameless fish made answer:
“Hither have I come, O minstrel,
In thine arms to rest and linger,
And thyself to love and cherish,
At thy side a life-companion,
And thy wife to be forever;
Deck thy couch with snowy linen,
Smooth thy head upon the pillow,
Sweep thy rooms and make them cheery,
Keep thy dwelling-place in order,
Build a fire for thee when needed,
Bake for thee the honey-biscuit,
Fill thy cup with barley-water,
Do for thee whatever pleases.

“I am not a scaly sea-fish,
Not a trout of Northland rivers,
Not a whiting from the waters,
Not a salmon of the North-seas,
I, a young and merry maiden,
Friend and sister of the fishes,
Youkahainen’s youngest sister,
I, the one that thou dost fish for,
I am Aino whom thou lovest.

“Once thou wert the wise-tongued hero,
Now the foolish Wainamoinen,
Scant of insight, scant of judgment,
Didst not know enough to keep me,
Cruel-hearted, bloody-handed,
Tried to kill me with thy fish-knife,
So to roast me for thy dinner;
I, a mermaid of Wellamo,
Once the fair and lovely Aino,
Sister dear of Youkahainen.”

Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:,
Filled with sorrow, much regretting:
“Since thou’rt Youkahainen’s sister,
Beauteous Aino of Pohyola,
Come to me again I pray thee!”

Thus the mermaid wisely answered:
“Nevermore will Aino’s spirit
Fly to thee and be ill-treated.”

Quickly dived the water-maiden
From the surface of the billow
To the many-colored pebbles,
To the rainbow-tinted grottoes
Where the mermaids live and linger.

Wainamoinen, not discouraged,
Thought afresh and well reflected,
How to live, and work, and win her;
Drew with care his silken fish-net,
To and fro through foam and billow,
Through the bays and winding channels,
Drew it through the placid waters,
Drew it through the salmon-dwellings,
Through the homes of water-maidens,
Through the waters of Wainola,
Through the blue-back of the ocean,
Through the lakes of distant Lapland,
Through the rivers of Youkola,
Through the seas of Kalevala,
Hoping thus to find his Aino.
Many were the fish he landed,
Every form of fish-like creatures,
But he did not catch the sea-maid,
Not Wellamo’s water-maiden,
Fairest daughter of the Northland.

Finally the ancient minstrel,
Mind depressed, and heart discouraged,
Spake these words, immersed in sorrow:
“Fool am I, and great my folly,
Having neither wit nor judgment;
Surely once I had some knowledge,
Had some insight into wisdom,
Had at least a bit of instinct;
But my virtues all have left me
In these mournful days of evil,
Vanished with my youth and vigor,
Insight gone, and sense departed,
All my prudence gone to others!
Aino, whom I love and cherish,
All these years have sought to honor,
Aino, now Wellamo’s maiden,
Promised friend of mine when needed,
Promised bride of mine forever,
Once I had within my power,
Caught her in Wellamo’s grottoes,
Led her to my boat of copper,
With my fish-line made of silver;
But alas! I could not keep her,
Did not know that I had caught her
Till too late to woo and win her;
Let her slip between my fingers
To the home of water-maidens,
To the kingdom of Wellamo.”

Wainamoinen then departed,
Empty-handed, heavy-hearted,
Straightway hastened to his country,
To his home in Kalevala,
Spake these words upon his journey:
“What has happened to the cuckoo,
Once the cuckoo bringing gladness,
In the morning, in the evening,
Often bringing joy at noontide?
What has stilled the cuckoo’s singing,
What has changed the cuckoo’s calling?
Sorrow must have stilled his singing,
And compassion changed his calling,
As I hear him sing no longer,
For my pleasure in the morning,
For my happiness at evening.
Never shall I learn the secret,
How to live and how to prosper,
How upon the earth to rest me,
How upon the seas to wander!
Only were my ancient mother
Living on the face of Northland,
Surely she would well advise me,
What my thought and what my action,
That this cup of grief might pass me,
That this sorrow might escape me,
And this darkened cloud pass over.”

In the deep awoke his mother,
From her tomb she spake as follows:
“Only sleeping was thy mother,
Now awakes to give thee answer,
What thy thought and what thine action,
That this cup of grief may pass thee,
That this sorrow may escape thee,
And this darkened cloud pass over.
Hie thee straightway to the Northland,
Visit thou the Suomi daughters;
Thou wilt find them wise and lovely,
Far more beautiful than Aino,
Far more worthy of a husband,
Not such silly chatter-boxes,
As the fickle Lapland maidens.
Take for thee a life-companion,
From the honest homes of Suomi,
One of Northland’s honest daughters;
She will charm thee with her sweetness,
Make thee happy through her goodness,
Form perfection, manners easy,
Every step and movement graceful,
Full of wit and good behavior,
Honor to thy home and kindred.”




RUNE VI.
WAINAMOINEN’S HAPLESS JOURNEY.


Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Now arranges for a journey
To the village of the Northland,
To the land of cruel winters,
To the land of little sunshine,
To the land of worthy women;
Takes his light-foot, royal racer,
Then adjusts the golden bridle,
Lays upon his back the saddle,
Silver-buckled, copper-stirruped,
Seats himself upon his courser,
And begins his journey northward;
Plunges onward, onward, onward,
Galloping along the highway,
In his saddle, gaily fashioned,
On his dappled steed of magic,
Plunging through Wainola’s meadows,
O’er the plains of Kalevala.
Fast and far he galloped onward,
Galloped far beyond Wainola,
Bounded o’er the waste of waters,
Till he reached the blue-sea’s margin,
Wetting not the hoofs in running.

But the evil Youkahainen
Nursed a grudge within his bosom,
In his heart the worm of envy,
Envy of this Wainamoinen,
Of this wonderful enchanter.
He prepares a cruel cross-bow,
Made of steel and other metals,
Paints the bow in many colors,
Molds the top-piece out of copper,
Trims his bow with snowy silver,
Gold he uses too in trimming.
Then he hunts for strongest sinews,
Finds them in the stag of Hisi,
Interweaves the flax of Lempo.
Ready is the cruel cross-bow,
String, and shaft, and ends are finished,
Beautiful the bow and mighty,
Surely cost it not a trifle;
On the back a painted courser,
On each end a colt of beauty,
Near the curve a maiden sleeping,
Near the notch a hare is bounding,
Wonderful the bow thus fashioned;
Cuts some arrows for his quiver,
Covers them with finest feathers,
From the oak the shafts he fashions,
Makes the tips of keenest metal.
As the rods and points are finished,
Then he feathers well his arrows
From the plumage of the swallow,
From the wing-quills of the sparrow;
Hardens well his feathered arrows,
And imparts to each new virtues,
Steeps them in the blood of serpents,
In the virus of the adder.

Ready now are all his arrows,
Ready strung, his cruel cross-bow,
Waiting for wise Wainamoinen.
Youkahainen, Lapland’s minstrel,
Waits a long time, is not weary,
Hopes to spy the ancient singer;
Spies at day-dawn, spies at evening,
Spies he ceaselessly at noontide,
Lies in wait for the magician,
Waits, and watches, as in envy;
Sits he at the open window,
Stands behind the hedge, and watches;
In the foot-path waits, and listens,
Spies along the balks of meadows;
On his back he hangs his quiver,
In his quiver, feathered arrows
Dipped in virus of the viper,
On his arm the mighty cross-bow,
Waits, and watches, and unwearied,
Listens from the boat-house window,
Lingers at the end of Fog-point,
By the river flowing seaward,
Near the holy stream and whirlpool,
Near the sacred river’s fire-fall.

Finally the Lapland minstrel,
Youkahainen of Pohyola,
At the breaking of the day-dawn,
At the early hour of morning,
Fixed his gaze upon the North-east,
Turned his eyes upon the sunrise,
Saw a black cloud on the ocean,
Something blue upon the waters,
And soliloquized as follows:
“Are those clouds on the horizon,
Or perchance the dawn of morning?
Neither clouds on the horizon,
Nor the dawning of the morning;
It is ancient Wainamoinen,
The renowned and wise enchanter,
Riding on his way to Northland;
On his steed, the royal racer,
Magic courser of Wainola.”

Quickly now young Youkahainen,
Lapland’s vain and evil minstrel,
Filled with envy, grasps his cross-bow,
Makes his bow and arrows ready
For the death of Wainamoinen.

Quick his aged mother asked him,
Spake these words to Youkahainen:
“For whose slaughter is thy cross-bow,
For whose heart thy poisoned arrows?”
Youkahainen thus made answer:
“I have made this mighty cross-bow,
Fashioned bow and poisoned arrows
For the death of Wainamoinen,
Thus to slay the friend of waters;
I must shoot the old magician,
The eternal bard and hero,
Through the heart, and through the liver,
Through the head, and through the shoulders,
With this bow and feathered arrows
Thus destroy my rival minstrel.”

Then the aged mother answered,
Thus reproving, thus forbidding:
“Do not slay good Wainamoinen,
Ancient hero of the Northland,
From a noble tribe descended,
He, my sister’s son, my nephew.
If thou slayest Wainamoinen,
Ancient son of Kalevala,
Then alas! all joy will vanish,
Perish all our wondrous singing;
Better on the earth the gladness,
Better here the magic music,
Than within the nether regions,
In the kingdom of Tuoni,
In the realm of the departed,
In the land of the hereafter.”

Then the youthful Youkahainen
Thought awhile and well considered,
Ere he made a final answer.

With one hand he raised the cross-bow
But the other seemed to weaken,
As he drew the cruel bow-string.
Finally these words he uttered
As his bosom swelled with envy:
“Let all joy forever vanish,
Let earth’s pleasures quickly perish,
Disappear earth’s sweetest music,
Happiness depart forever;
Shoot I will this rival minstrel,
Little heeding what the end is.”

Quickly now he bends his fire-bow,
On his left knee rests the weapon,
With his right foot firmly planted,
Thus he strings his bow of envy;
Takes three arrows from his quiver,
Choosing well the best among them,
Carefully adjusts the bow-string,
Sets with care the feathered arrow,
To the flaxen string he lays it,
Holds the cross-bow to his shoulder,
Aiming well along the margin,
At the heart of Wainamoinen,
Waiting till he gallops nearer;
In the shadow of a thicket,
Speaks these words while he is waiting
“Be thou, flaxen string, elastic;
Swiftly fly, thou feathered ash-wood,
Swiftly speed, thou deadly missile,
Quick as light, thou poisoned arrow,
To the heart of Wainamoinen.
If my hand too low should hold thee,
May the gods direct thee higher;
If too high mine eye should aim thee,
May the gods direct thee lower.”

Steady now he pulls the trigger;
Like the lightning flies the arrow
O’er the head of Wainamoinen;
To the upper sky it darteth,
And the highest clouds it pierces,
Scatters all the flock of lamb-clouds,
On its rapid journey skyward.

Not discouraged, quick selecting,
Quick adjusting, Youkahainen,
Quickly aiming, shoots a second.
Speeds the arrow swift as lightning;
Much too low he aimed the missile,
Into earth the arrow plunges,
Pierces to the lower regions,
Splits in two the old Sand Mountain.

Nothing daunted, Youkahainen,
Quick adjusting shoots a third one.
Swift as light it speeds its journey,
Strikes the steed of Wainamoinen,
Strikes the light-foot, ocean-swimmer,
Strikes him near his golden girdle,
Through the shoulder of the racer.

Thereupon wise Wainamoinen
Headlong fell upon the waters,
Plunged beneath the rolling billows,
From the saddle of the courser,
From his dappled steed of magic.
Then arose a mighty storm-wind,
Roaring wildly on the waters,
Bore away old Wainamoinen
Far from land upon the billows,
On the high and rolling billows,
On the broad sea’s great expanses.

Boasted then young Youkahainen,
Thinking Waino dead and buried,
These the boastful words he uttered:
“Nevermore, old Wainamoinen,
Nevermore in all thy life-time,
While the golden moonlight glistens,
Nevermore wilt fix thy vision
On the meadows of Wainola,
On the plains of Kalevala;
Full six years must swim the ocean,
Tread the waves for seven summers,
Eight years ride the foamy billows,
In the broad expanse of water;
Six long autumns as a fir-tree,
Seven winters as a pebble,
Eight long summers as an aspen.”

Thereupon the Lapland minstrel
Hastened to his room delighting,
When his mother thus addressed him
“Hast thou slain good Wainamoinen,
Slain the son of Kalevala?”
Youkahainen thus made answer:
“I have slain old Wainamoinen,
Slain the son of Kalevala,
That he now may plow the ocean,
That he now may sweep the waters,
On the billows rock and slumber.
In the salt-sea plunged he headlong,
In the deep sank the magician,
Sidewise turned he to the sea-shore,
On his back to rock forever,
Thus the boundless sea to travel,
Thus to ride the rolling billows.”
This the answer of the mother:
“Woe to earth for this thine action,
Gone forever, joy and singing,
Vanished is the wit of ages!
Thou hast slain good Wainamoinen,
Slain the ancient wisdom-singer,
Slain the pride of Suwantala,
Slain the hero of Wainola,
Slain the joy of Kalevala.”




RUNE VII.
WAINAMOINEN’S RESCUE.


Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Swam through all the deep-sea waters,
Floating like a branch of aspen,
Like a withered twig of willow;
Swam six days in summer weather,
Swam six nights in golden moonlight;
Still before him rose the billows,
And behind him sky and ocean.
Two days more he swam undaunted,
Two long nights he struggled onward.
On the evening of the eighth day,
Wainamoinen grew disheartened,
Felt a very great discomfort,
For his feet had lost their toe-nails,
And his fingers dead and dying.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Sad and weary, spake as follows:
“Woe is me, my old life fated!
Woe is me, misfortune’s offspring!
Fool was I when fortune favored,
To forsake my home and kindred,
For a maiden fair and lovely,
Here beneath the starry heavens,
In this cruel waste of waters,
Days and nights to swim and wander,
Here to struggle with the storm-winds,
To be tossed by heaving billows,
In this broad sea’s great expanses,
In this ocean vast and boundless.

“Cold my life and sad and dreary,
Painful too for me to linger
Evermore within these waters,
Thus to struggle for existence!
Cannot know how I can prosper,
How to find me food and shelter,
In these cold and lifeless waters,
In these days of dire misfortune.
Build I in the winds my dwelling?
It will find no sure foundation.
Build my home upon the billows?
Surely would the waves destroy it.”

Comes a bird from far Pohyola,
From the occident, an eagle,
Is not classed among the largest,
Nor belongs he to the smallest;
One wing touches on the waters,
While the other sweeps the heavens;
O’er the waves he wings his body,
Strikes his beak upon the sea-cliffs,
Flies about, then safely perches,
Looks before him, looks behind him,
There beholds brave Wainamoinen,
On the blue-back of the ocean,
And the eagle thus accosts him:
“Wherefore art thou, ancient hero,
Swimming in the deep-sea billows?”
Thus the water-minstrel answered:
“I am ancient Wainamoinen,
Friend and fellow of the waters,
I, the famous wisdom-singer;
Went to woo a Northland maiden,
Maiden from the dismal Darkland,
Quickly galloped on my journey,
Riding on the plain of ocean.
I arrived one morning early,
At the breaking of the day-dawn.
At the bay of Luotola,
Near Youkola’s foaming river,
Where the evil Youkahainen
Slew my steed with bow and arrow,
Tried to slay me with his weapons.
On the waters fell I headlong,
Plunged beneath the salt-sea’s surface,
From the saddle of the courser,
From my dappled steed of magic.

“Then arose a mighty storm-wind,
From the East and West a whirlwind,
Washed me seaward on the surges,
Seaward, seaward, further, further,
Where for many days I wandered,
Swam and rocked upon the billows,
Where as many nights I struggled,
In the dashing waves and sea-foam,
With the angry winds and waters.

“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!
Cannot solve this heavy problem,
How to live nor how to perish
In this cruel salt-sea water.
Build I in the winds my dwelling?
It will find no sure foundation.
Build my home upon the waters?
Surely will the waves destroy it.
Must I swim the sea forever,
Must I live, or must I perish?
What will happen if I perish,
If I sink below the billows,
Perish here from cold and hunger?”
Thus the bird of Ether answered:
“Be not in the least disheartened,
Place thyself between my shoulders,
On my back be firmly seated,
I will lift thee from the waters,
Bear thee with my pinions upward,
Bear thee wheresoe’er thou willest.
Well do I the day remember
Where thou didst the eagle service,
When thou didst the birds a favor.
Thou didst leave the birch-tree standing,
When were cleared the Osmo-forests,
From the lands of Kalevala,
As a home for weary song-birds,
As a resting-place for eagles.”

Then arises Wainamoinen,
Lifts his head above the waters,
Boldly rises from the sea-waves,
Lifts his body from the billows,
Seats himself upon the eagle,
On the eagle’s feathered shoulders.
Quick aloft the huge bird bears him,
Bears the ancient Wainamoinen,
Bears him on the path of zephyrs,
Floating on the vernal breezes,
To the distant shore of Northland,
To the dismal Sariola,
Where the eagle leaves his burden,
Flies away to join his fellows.

Wainamoinen, lone and weary,
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,
Wept and moaned in heavy accents,
On the border of the blue-sea,
On a cheerless promontory,
With a hundred wounds tormented,
Made by cruel winds and waters,
With his hair and beard dishevelled
By the surging of the billows.
Three long days he wept disheartened
Wept as many nights in anguish,
Did not know what way to journey,
Could not find a woodland foot-print,
That would point him to the highway,
To his home in Kalevala,
To his much-loved home and kindred.

Northland’s young and slender maiden,
With complexion fair and lovely,
With the Sun had laid a wager,
With the Sun and Moon a wager,
Which should rise before the other,
On the morning of the morrow.
And the maiden rose in beauty,
Long before the Sun had risen,
Long before the Moon had wakened,
From their beds beneath the ocean.
Ere the cock had crowed the day-break,
Ere the Sun had broken slumber;
She had sheared six gentle lambkins,
Gathered from them six white fleeces,
Hence to make the rolls for spinning,
Hence to form the threads for weaving,
Hence to make the softest raiment,
Ere the morning dawn had broken,
Ere the sleeping Sun had risen.

When this task the maid had ended,
Then she scrubbed the birchen tables,
Sweeps the ground-floor of the stable,
With a broom of leaves and branches
From the birches of the Northland,
Scrapes the sweepings well together
On a shovel made of copper,
Carries them beyond the stable,
From the doorway to the meadow,
To the meadow’s distant border,
Near the surges of the great-sea,
Listens there and looks about her,
Hears a wailing from the waters,
Hears a weeping from the sea-shore,
Hears a hero-voice lamenting.

Thereupon she hastens homeward,
Hastens to her mother’s dwelling,
These the words the maiden utters:
“I have heard a wail from ocean,
Heard a weeping from the sea-coast,
On the shore some one lamenting.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Ancient, toothless dame of Northland,
Hastens from her door and court-yard,
Through the meadow to the sea-shore,
Listens well for sounds of weeping,
For the wail of one in sorrow;
Hears the voice of one in trouble,
Hears a hero-cry of anguish.
Thus the ancient Louhi answers:
“This is not the wail of children,
These are not the tears of women,
In this way weep bearded heroes;
This the hero-cry of anguish.”

Quick she pushed her boat to water,
To the floods her goodly vessel,
Straightway rows with lightning swiftness,
To the weeping Wainamoinen;
Gives the hero consolation,
Comfort gives she to the minstrel
Wailing in a grove of willows,
In his piteous condition,
Mid the alder-trees and aspens,
On the border of the salt-sea,
Visage trembling, locks dishevelled,
Ears, and eyes, and lips of sadness.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Thus addresses Wainamoinen:
“Tell me what has been thy folly,
That thou art in this condition.”

Old and truthful Wainamoinen
Lifts aloft his head and answers:
“Well I know that it is folly
That has brought me all this trouble,
Brought me to this land of strangers,
To these regions unbefitting;
Happy was I with my kindred,
In my distant home and country,
There my name was named in honor.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Thus replied to Wainamoinen:
“I would gain the information,
Should I be allowed to ask thee,
Who thou art of ancient heroes,
Who of all the host of heroes?”
This is Wainamoinen’s answer:
“Formerly my name was mentioned,
Often was I heard and honored,
As a minstrel and magician,
In the long and dreary winters,
Called the Singer of the Northland,
In the valleys of Wainola,
On the plains of Kalevala;
No one thought that such misfortune
Could befall wise Wainamoinen.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Thus replied in cheering accents:
“Rise, O hero, from discomfort,
From thy bed among the willows;
Enter now upon the new-way,
Come with me to yonder dwelling,
There relate thy strange adventures,
Tell the tale of thy misfortunes.”

Now she takes the hapless hero,
Lifts him from his bed of sorrow,
In her boat she safely seats him,
And begins at once her rowing,
Rows with steady hand and mighty
To her home upon the sea-shore,
To the dwellings of Pohyola.
There she feeds the starving hero,
Rests the ancient Wainamoinen,
Gives him warmth, and food, and shelter,
And the hero soon recovers.

Then the hostess of Pohyola
Questioned thus the ancient singer:
“Wherefore didst thou, Wainamoinen,
Friend and fellow of the waters,
Weep in sad and bitter accents,
On the border of the ocean,
Mid the aspens and the willows?”

This is Wainamoinen’s answer:
“Had good reason for my weeping,
Cause enough for all my sorrow;
Long indeed had I been swimming,
Had been buffeting the billows,
In the far outstretching waters.
This the reason for my weeping;
I have lived in toil and torture,
Since I left my home and country,
Left my native land and kindred,
Came to this the land of strangers,
To these unfamiliar portals.
All thy trees have thorns to wound me,
All thy branches, spines to pierce me,
Even birches give me trouble,
And the alders bring discomfort,
My companions, winds and waters,
Only does the Sun seem friendly,
In this cold and cruel country,
Near these unfamiliar portals.”

Louhi thereupon made answer:
“Weep no longer, Wainamoinen,
Grieve no more, thou friend of waters,
Good for thee, that thou shouldst linger
At our friendly homes and firesides;
Thou shalt live with us and welcome,
Thou shalt sit at all our tables,
Eat the salmon from our platters,
Eat the sweetest of our bacon,
Eat the whiting from our waters.”

Answers thus old Wainamoinen,
Grateful for the invitation:
“Never do I court strange tables,
Though the food be rare and toothsome;
One’s own country is the dearest,
One’s own table is the sweetest,
One’s own home, the most attractive.
Grant, kind Ukko, God above me,
Thou Creator, full of mercy,
Grant that I again may visit
My beloved home and country.
Better dwell in one’s own country,
There to drink its healthful waters
From the simple cups of birch-wood,
Than in foreign lands to wander,
There to drink the rarest liquors
From the golden bowls of strangers.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Thus replied to the magician:
“What reward wilt thou award me,
Should I take thee where thou willest,
To thy native land and kindred,
To thy much-loved home and fireside,
To the meadows of Wainola,
To the plains of Kalevala?”

These the words of Wainamoinen:
“What would be reward sufficient,
Shouldst thou take me to my people,
To my home and distant country,
To the borders of the Northland,
There to hear the cuckoo singing,
Hear the sacred cuckoo calling?
Shall I give thee golden treasures,
Fill thy cups with finest silver?”

This is Louhi’s simple answer:
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Only true and wise magician,
Never will I ask for riches,
Never ask for gold nor silver;
Gold is for the children’s flowers,
Silver for the stallion’s jewels.
Canst thou forge for me the Sampo,
Hammer me the lid in colors,
From the tips of white-swan feathers
From the milk of greatest virtue,
From a single grain of barley,
From the finest wool of lambkins?

“I will give thee too my daughter,
Will reward thee through the maiden,
Take thee to thy much-loved home-land,
To the borders of Wainola,
There to hear the cuckoo singing,
Hear the sacred cuckoo calling.”

Wainamoinen, much regretting,
Gave this answer to her question:
“Cannot forge for thee the Sampo,
Cannot make the lid in colors.
Take me to my distant country,
I will send thee Ilmarinen,
He will forge for thee the Sampo,
Hammer thee the lid in colors,
He may win thy lovely maiden;
Worthy smith is Ilmarinen,
In this art is first and master;
He, the one that forged the heavens.
Forged the air a hollow cover;
Nowhere see we hammer-traces,
Nowhere find a single tongs-mark.”

Thus replied the hostess, Louhi:
“Him alone I’ll give my daughter,
Promise him my child in marriage,
Who for me will forge the Sampo,
Hammer me the lid in colors,
From the tips of white-swan feathers,
From the milk of greatest virtue,
From a single grain of barley,
From the finest wool of lambkins.”

Thereupon the hostess Louhi,
Harnessed quick a dappled courser,
Hitched him to her sledge of birch-wood,
Placed within it Wainamoinen,
Placed the hero on the cross-bench,
Made him ready for his journey;
Then addressed the ancient minstrel,
These the words that Louhi uttered:
“Do not raise thine eyes to heaven,
Look not upward on thy journey,
While thy steed is fresh and frisky,
While the day-star lights thy pathway,
Ere the evening star has risen;
If thine eyes be lifted upward,
While the day-star lights thy pathway,
Dire misfortune will befall thee,
Some sad fate will overtake thee.”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Fleetly drove upon his journey,
Merrily he hastened homeward,
Hastened homeward, happy-hearted
From the ever-darksome Northland
From the dismal Sariola.




RUNE VIII.
MAIDEN OF THE RAINBOW.


Pohyola’s fair and winsome daughter,
Glory of the land and water,
Sat upon the bow of heaven,
On its highest arch resplendent,
In a gown of richest fabric,
In a gold and silver air-gown,
Weaving webs of golden texture,
Interlacing threads of silver;
Weaving with a golden shuttle,
With a weaving-comb of silver;
Merrily flies the golden shuttle,
From the maiden’s nimble fingers,
Briskly swings the lathe in weaving,
Swiftly flies the comb of silver,
From the sky-born maiden’s fingers,
Weaving webs of wondrous beauty.

Came the ancient Wainamoinen,
Driving down the highway homeward,
From the ever sunless Northland,
From the dismal Sariola;
Few the furlongs he had driven,
Driven but a little distance,
When he heard the sky-loom buzzing,
As the maiden plied the shuttle.
Quick the thoughtless Wainamoinen
Lifts his eyes aloft in wonder,
Looks upon the vault of heaven,
There beholds the bow of beauty,
On the bow the maiden sitting,
Beauteous Maiden of the Rainbow,
Glory of the earth and ocean,
Weaving there a golden fabric,
Working with the rustling silver.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Quickly checks his fleet-foot racer,
Looks upon the charming maiden,
Then addresses her as follows:
“Come, fair maiden, to my snow-sledge,
By my side I wish thee seated.”

Thus the Maid of Beauty answers:
“Tell me what thou wishest of me,
Should I join thee in the snow-sledge.”
Speaks the ancient Wainamoinen,
Answers thus the Maid of Beauty:
“This the reason for thy coming:
Thou shalt bake me honey-biscuit,
Shalt prepare me barley-water,
Thou shalt fill my foaming beer-cups,
Thou shalt sing beside my table,
Shalt rejoice within my portals,
Walk a queen within my dwelling,
In the Wainola halls and chambers,
In the courts of Kalevala.”

Thus the Maid of Beauty answered
From her throne amid the heavens:
“Yesterday at hour of twilight,
Went I to the flowery meadows,
There to rock upon the common,
Where the Sun retires to slumber;
There I heard a song-bird singing,
Heard the thrush in simple measures,
Singing sweetly thoughts of maidens,
And the minds of anxious mothers.

“Then I asked the pretty songster,
Asked the thrush this simple question:
‘Sing to me, thou pretty song-bird,
Sing that I may understand thee,
Sing to me in truthful accents,
How to live in greatest pleasure,
And in happiness the sweetest,
As a maiden with her father,
Or as wife beside her husband.’

“Thus the song-bird gave me answer,
Sang the thrush this information:
‘Bright and warm are days of summer,
Warmer still is maiden-freedom;
Cold is iron in the winter,
Thus the lives of married women;
Maidens living with their mothers
Are like ripe and ruddy berries;
Married women, far too many,
Are like dogs enchained in kennel,
Rarely do they ask for favors,
Not to wives are favors given.’”

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Answers thus the Maid of Beauty:
“Foolish is the thrush thus singing,
Nonsense is the song-bird’s twitter;
Like to babes are maidens treated,
Wives are queens and highly honored.
Come, sweet maiden, to my snow-sledge,
I am not despised as hero,
Not the meanest of magicians;
Come with me and I will make thee
Wife and queen in Kalevala.”
Thus the Maid of Beauty answered:
“Would consider thee a hero,
Mighty hero, I would call thee,
When a golden hair thou splittest,
Using knives that have no edges;
When thou snarest me a bird’s egg
With a snare that I can see not.”

Wainamoinen, skilled and ancient,
Split a golden hair exactly,
Using knives that had no edges;
And he snared an egg as nicely
With a snare the maiden saw not.

“Come, sweet maiden, to my snow-sledge,
I have done what thou desirest.”
Thus the maiden wisely answered:
“Never enter I thy snow-sledge,
Till thou peelest me the sandstone,
Till thou cuttest me a whip-stick
From the ice, and make no splinters,
Losing not the smallest fragment.”

Wainamoinen, true magician,
Nothing daunted, not discouraged,
Deftly peeled the rounded sandstone,
Deftly cut from ice a whip-stick,
Cutting not the finest splinter,
Losing not the smallest fragment.
Then again he called the maiden,
To a seat within his snow-sledge.

But the Maid or Beauty answered,
Answered thus the great magician:
“I will go with that one only
That will make me ship or shallop,
From the splinters of my spindle,
From the fragments of my distaff,
In the waters launch the vessel,
Set the little ship a-floating,
Using not the knee to push it,
Using not the arm to move it,
Using not the hand to touch it,
Using not the foot to turn it,
Using nothing to propel it.”

Spake the skilful Wainamoinen,
These the words the hero uttered:
“There is no one in the Northland,
No one under vault of heaven,
Who like me can build a vessel,
From the fragments of the distaff,
From the splinters of the spindle.”

Then he took the distaff-fragments,
Took the splinters of the spindle,
Hastened off the boat to fashion,
Hastened to an iron mountain,
There to join the many fragments.
Full of zeal he plies the hammer,
Swings the hammer and the hatchet;
Nothing daunted, builds the vessel,
Works one day and then a second,
Works with steady hand the third day;
On the evening of the third day,
Evil Hisi grasps the hatchet,
Lempo takes the crooked handle,
Turns aside the axe in falling,
Strikes the rocks and breaks to pieces;
From the rocks rebound the fragments,
Pierce the flesh of the magician,
Cut the knee of Wainamoinen.
Lempo guides the sharpened hatchet,
And the veins fell Hisi severs.
Quickly gushes forth a blood-stream,
And the stream is crimson-colored.

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
The renowned and wise enchanter,
Thus outspeaks in measured accents:
“O thou keen and cruel hatchet,
O thou axe of sharpened metal,
Thou shouldst cut the trees to fragments,
Cut the pine-tree and the willow,
Cut the alder and the birch-tree,
Cut the juniper and aspen,
Shouldst not cut my knee to pieces,
Shouldst not tear my veins asunder.”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Thus begins his incantations,
Thus begins his magic singing,
Of the origin of evil;
Every word in perfect order,
Makes no effort to remember,
Sings the origin of iron,
That a bolt he well may fashion,
Thus prepare a lock for surety,
For the wounds the axe has given,
That the hatchet has torn open.
But the stream flows like a brooklet,
Rushing like a maddened torrent,
Stains the herbs upon the meadows,
Scarcely is a bit of verdure
That the blood-stream does not cover
As it flows and rushes onward
From the knee of the magician,
From the veins of Wainamoinen.

Now the wise and ancient minstrel
Gathers lichens from the sandstone,
Picks them from the trunks of birches,
Gathers moss within the marshes,
Pulls the grasses from the meadows,
Thus to stop the crimson streamlet,
Thus to close the wounds laid open;
But his work is unsuccessful,
And the crimson stream flows onward.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Feeling pain and fearing languor,
Falls to weeping, heavy-hearted;
Quickly now his steed he hitches,
Hitches to the sledge of birch-wood,
Climbs with pain upon the cross-bench,
Strikes his steed in quick succession,
Snaps his whip above the racer,
And the steed flies onward swiftly;
Like the winds he sweeps the highway,
Till he nears a Northland village,
Where the way is triple-parted.

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Takes the lowest of the highways,
Quickly nears a spacious cottage,
Quickly asks before the doorway:
“Is there any one here dwelling,
That can know the pain I suffer,
That can heal this wound of hatchet.
That can check this crimson streamlet?”

Sat a boy within a corner,
On a bench beside a baby,
And he answered thus the hero:
“There is no one in this dwelling
That can know the pain thou feelest,
That can heal the wounds of hatchet,
That can check the crimson streamlet;
Some one lives in yonder cottage,
That perchance can do thee service.”

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Whips his courser to a gallop,
Dashes on along the highway;
Only drives a little distance,
On the middle of the highways,
To a cabin on the road-side,
Asks one standing on the threshold,
Questions all through open windows,
These the words the hero uses:
“Is there no one in this cabin,
That can know the pain I suffer,
That can heal this wound of hatchet,
That can check this crimson streamlet?”

On the floor a witch was lying,
Near the fire-place lay the beldame,
Thus she spake to Wainamoinen,
Through her rattling teeth she answered:
“There is no one in this cabin
That can know the pain thou feelest,
That can heal the wounds of hatchets,
That can check the crimson streamlet;
Some one lives in yonder cottage,
That perchance can do thee service.”

Wainamoinen, nothing daunted,
Whips his racer to a gallop,
Dashes on along the highway;
Only drives a little distance,
On the upper of the highways,
Gallops to a humble cottage,
Asks one standing near the penthouse,
Sitting on the penthouse-doorsill:
“Is there no one in this cottage,
That can know the pain I suffer,
That can heal this wound of hatchet,
That can check this crimson streamlet?”

Near the fireplace sat an old man,
On the hearthstone sat the gray-beard,
Thus he answered Wainamoinen:
“Greater things have been accomplished,
Much more wondrous things effected,
Through but three words of the master;
Through the telling of the causes,
Streams and oceans have been tempered,
River cataracts been lessened,
Bays been made of promontories,
Islands raised from deep sea-bottoms.”




RUNE IX.
ORIGIN OF IRON.


Wainamoinen, thus encouraged,
Quickly rises in his snow-sledge,
Asking no one for assistance,
Straightway hastens to the cottage,
Takes a seat within the dwelling.
Come two maids with silver pitchers,
Bringing also golden goblets;
Dip they up a very little,
But the very smallest measure
Of the blood of the magician,
From the wounds of Wainamoinen.

From the fire-place calls the old man,
Thus the gray-beard asks the minstrel:
“Tell me who thou art of heroes,
Who of all the great magicians?
Lo! thy blood fills seven sea-boats,
Eight of largest birchen vessels,
Flowing from some hero’s veinlets,
From the wounds of some magician.
Other matters I would ask thee;
Sing the cause of this thy trouble,
Sing to me the source of metals,
Sing the origin of iron,
How at first it was created.”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Made this answer to the gray-beard:
“Know I well the source of metals,
Know the origin of iron;
I can tell bow steel is fashioned.
Of the mothers air is oldest,
Water is the oldest brother,
And the fire is second brother,
And the youngest brother, iron;
Ukko is the first creator.
Ukko, maker of the heavens,
Cut apart the air and water,
Ere was born the metal, iron.
Ukko, maker of the heavens,
Firmly rubbed his hands together,
Firmly pressed them on his knee-cap,
Then arose three lovely maidens,
Three most beautiful of daughters;
These were mothers of the iron,
And of steel of bright-blue color.
Tremblingly they walked the heavens,
Walked the clouds with silver linings,
With their bosoms overflowing
With the milk of future iron,
Flowing on and flowing ever,
From the bright rims of the cloudlets
To the earth, the valleys filling,
To the slumber-calling waters.

“Ukko’s eldest daughter sprinkled
Black milk over river channels
And the second daughter sprinkled
White milk over hills and mountains,
While the youngest daughter sprinkled
Red milk over seas and oceans.
Where the black milk had been sprinked,
Grew the dark and ductile iron;
Where the white milk had been sprinkled,
Grew the iron, lighter-colored;
Where the red milk had been sprinkled,
Grew the red and brittle iron.

“After Time had gone a distance,
Iron hastened Fire to visit,
His beloved elder brother,
Thus to know his brother better.
Straightway Fire began his roarings,
Labored to consume his brother,
His beloved younger brother.
Straightway Iron sees his danger,
Saves himself by fleetly fleeing,
From the fiery flame’s advances,
Fleeing hither, fleeing thither,
Fleeing still and taking shelter
In the swamps and in the valleys,
In the springs that loudly bubble,
By the rivers winding seaward,
On the broad backs of the marshes,
Where the swans their nests have builded,
Where the wild geese hatch their goslings.

“Thus is iron in the swamp-lands,
Stretching by the water-courses,
Hidden well for many ages,
Hidden in the birchen forests,
But he could not hide forever
From the searchings of his brother;
Here and there the fire has caught him,
Caught and brought him to his furnace,
That the spears, and swords, and axes,
Might be forged and duly hammered.
In the swamps ran blackened waters,
From the heath the bears came ambling,
And the wolves ran through the marshes.
Iron then made his appearance,
Where the feet of wolves had trodden,
Where the paws of bears had trampled.

“Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Came to earth to work the metal;
He was born upon the Coal-mount,
Skilled and nurtured in the coal-fields;
In one hand, a copper hammer,
In the other, tongs of iron;
In the night was born the blacksmith,
In the morn he built his smithy,
Sought with care a favored hillock,
Where the winds might fill his bellows;
Found a hillock in the swamp-lands,
Where the iron hid abundant;
There he built his smelting furnace,
There he laid his leathern bellows,
Hastened where the wolves had travelled,
Followed where the bears had trampled,
Found the iron’s young formations,
In the wolf-tracks of the marshes,
In the foot-prints of the gray-bear.

“Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Thus addressed the sleeping iron:
‘Thou most useful of the metals,
Thou art sleeping in the marshes,
Thou art hid in low conditions,
Where the wolf treads in the swamp-lands,
Where the bear sleeps in the thickets.
Hast thou thought and well considered,
What would be thy future station,
Should I place thee in the furnace,
Thus to make thee free and useful?’

“Then was Iron sorely frightened,
Much distressed and filled with horror,
When of Fire he heard the mention,
Mention of his fell destroyer.

“Then again speaks Ilmarinen,
Thus the smith addresses Iron:
‘Be not frightened, useful metal,
Surely Fire will not consume thee,
Will not burn his youngest brother,
Will not harm his nearest kindred.
Come thou to my room and furnace,
Where the fire is freely burning,
Thou wilt live, and grow, and prosper,
Wilt become the swords of heroes,
Buckles for the belts of women.’

“Ere arose the star of evening,
Iron ore had left the marshes,
From the water-beds had risen,
Had been carried to the furnace,
In the fire the smith had laid it,
Laid it in his smelting furnace.
Ilmarinen starts the bellows,
Gives three motions of the handle,
And the iron flows in streamlets
From the forge of the magician,
Soon becomes like baker’s leaven,
Soft as dough for bread of barley.
Then out-screamed the metal, Iron:
‘Wondrous blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Take, O take me from thy furnace,
From this fire and cruel torture.’

“Ilmarinen thus made answer:
‘I will take thee from my furnace,
Thou art but a little frightened,
Thou shalt be a mighty power,
Thou shalt slay the best of heroes,
Thou shalt wound thy dearest brother.’

“Straightway Iron made this promise,
Vowed and swore in strongest accents,
By the furnace, by the anvil,
By the tongs, and by the hammer,
These the words he vowed and uttered:
‘Many trees that I shall injure,
Shall devour the hearts of mountains,
Shall not slay my nearest kindred,
Shall not kill the best of heroes,
Shall not wound my dearest brother;
Better live in civil freedom,
Happier would be my life-time,
Should I serve my fellow-beings,
Serve as tools for their convenience,
Than as implements of warfare,
Slay my friends and nearest kindred,
Wound the children of my mother.’

“Now the master, Ilmarinen,
The renowned and skilful blacksmith,
From the fire removes the iron,
Places it upon the anvil,
Hammers well until it softens,
Hammers many fine utensils,
Hammers spears, and swords, and axes,
Hammers knives, and forks, and hatchets,
Hammers tools of all descriptions.

“Many things the blacksmith needed,
Many things he could not fashion,
Could not make the tongue of iron,
Could not hammer steel from iron,
Could not make the iron harden.
Well considered Ilmarinen,
Deeply thought and long reflected.
Then he gathered birchen ashes,
Steeped the ashes in the water,
Made a lye to harden iron,
Thus to form the steel most needful.
With his tongue he tests the mixture,
Weighs it long and well considers,
And the blacksmith speaks as follows:
‘All this labor is for nothing,
Will not fashion steel from iron,
Will not make the soft ore harden.’

“Now a bee flies from the meadow,
Blue-wing coming from the flowers,
Flies about, then safely settles
Near the furnace of the smithy.

“Thus the smith the bee addresses,
These the words of Ilmarinen:
‘Little bee, thou tiny birdling,
Bring me honey on thy winglets,
On thy tongue, I pray thee, bring me
Sweetness from the fragrant meadows,
From the little cups of flowers,
From the tips of seven petals,
That we thus may aid the water
To produce the steel from iron.’

“Evil Hisi’s bird, the hornet,
Heard these words of Ilmarinen,
Looking from the cottage gable,
Flying to the bark of birch-trees,
While the iron bars were heating,
While the steel was being tempered;
Swiftly flew the stinging hornet,
Scattered all the Hisi horrors,
Brought the blessing of the serpent,
Brought the venom of the adder,
Brought the poison of the spider,
Brought the stings of all the insects,
Mixed them with the ore and water,
While the steel was being tempered.

“Ilmarinen, skilful blacksmith,
First of all the iron-workers,
Thought the bee had surely brought him
Honey from the fragrant meadows,
From the little cups of flowers,
From the tips of seven petals,
And he spake the words that follow:
‘Welcome, welcome, is thy coming,
Honeyed sweetness from the flowers
Thou hast brought to aid the water,
Thus to form the steel from iron!’

“Ilmarinen, ancient blacksmith,
Dipped the iron into water,
Water mixed with many poisons,
Thought it but the wild bee’s honey;
Thus he formed the steel from iron.
When he plunged it into water,
Water mixed with many poisons,
When he placed it in the furnace,
Angry grew the hardened iron,
Broke the vow that he had taken,
Ate his words like dogs and devils,
Mercilessly cut his brother,
Madly raged against his kindred,
Caused the blood to flow in streamlets
From the wounds of man and hero.
This, the origin of iron,
And of steel of light blue color.”

From the hearth arose the gray-beard,
Shook his heavy locks and answered:
“Now I know the source of iron,
Whence the steel and whence its evils;
Curses on thee, cruel iron,
Curses on the steel thou givest,
Curses on thee, tongue of evil,
Cursed be thy life forever!
Once thou wert of little value,
Having neither form nor beauty,
Neither strength nor great importance,
When in form of milk thou rested,
When for ages thou wert hidden
In the breasts of God’s three daughters,
Hidden in their heaving bosoms,
On the borders of the cloudlets,
In the blue vault of the heavens.

“Thou wert once of little value,
Having neither form nor beauty,
Neither strength nor great importance,
When like water thou wert resting
On the broad back of the marshes,
On the steep declines of mountains,
When thou wert but formless matter,
Only dust of rusty color.

“Surely thou wert void of greatness,
Having neither strength nor beauty,
When the moose was trampling on thee,
When the roebuck trod upon thee,
When the tracks of wolves were in thee,
And the bear-paws scratched thy body.
Surely thou hadst little value
When the skilful Ilmarinen,
First of all the iron-workers,
Brought thee from the blackened swamp-lands,
Took thee to his ancient smithy,
Placed thee in his fiery furnace.
Truly thou hadst little vigor,
Little strength, and little danger,
When thou in the fire wert hissing,
Rolling forth like seething water,
From the furnace of the smithy,
When thou gavest oath the strongest,
By the furnace, by the anvil,
By the tongs, and by the hammer,
By the dwelling of the blacksmith,
By the fire within the furnace.

“Now forsooth thou hast grown mighty,
Thou canst rage in wildest fury;
Thou hast broken all thy pledges,
All thy solemn vows hast broken,
Like the dogs thou shamest honor,
Shamest both thyself and kindred,
Tainted all with breath of evil.
Tell who drove thee to this mischief,
Tell who taught thee all thy malice,
Tell who gavest thee thine evil!
Did thy father, or thy mother,
Did the eldest of thy brothers,
Did the youngest of thy sisters,
Did the worst of all thy kindred
Give to thee thine evil nature?
Not thy father, nor thy mother,
Not the eldest of thy brothers,
Not the youngest of thy sisters,
Not the worst of all thy kindred,
But thyself hast done this mischief,
Thou the cause of all our trouble.
Come and view thine evil doings,
And amend this flood of damage,
Ere I tell thy gray-haired mother,
Ere I tell thine aged father.
Great indeed a mother’s anguish,
Great indeed a father’s sorrow,
When a son does something evil,
When a child runs wild and lawless.

“Crimson streamlet, cease thy flowing
From the wounds of Wainamoinen;
Blood of ages, stop thy coursing
From the veins of the magician;
Stand like heaven’s crystal pillars,
Stand like columns in the ocean,
Stand like birch-trees in the forest,
Like the tall reeds in the marshes,
Like the high-rocks on the sea-coast,
Stand by power of mighty magic!

“Should perforce thy will impel thee,
Flow thou on thine endless circuit,
Through the veins of Wainamoinen,
Through the bones, and through the muscles,
Through the lungs, and heart, and liver,
Of the mighty sage and singer;
Better be the food of heroes,
Than to waste thy strength and virtue,
On the meadows and the woodlands,
And be lost in dust and ashes.
Flow forever in thy circle;
Thou must cease this crimson out-flow;
Stain no more the grass and flowers,
Stain no more these golden hill-tops,
Pride and beauty of our heroes.
In the veins of the magician,
In the heart of Wainamoinen,
Is thy rightful home and storehouse.
Thither now withdraw thy forces,
Thither hasten, swiftly flowing;
Flow no more as crimson currents,
Fill no longer crimson lakelets,
Must not rush like brooks in spring-tide,
Nor meander like the rivers.

“Cease thy flow, by word of magic,
Cease as did the falls of Tyrya,
As the rivers of Tuoni,
When the sky withheld her rain-drops,
When the sea gave up her waters,
In the famine of the seasons,
In the years of fire and torture.
If thou heedest not this order,
I shall offer other measures,
Know I well of other forces;
I shall call the Hisi irons,
In them I shall boil and roast thee,
Thus to check thy crimson flowing,
Thus to save the wounded hero.

“If these means be inefficient,
Should these measures prove unworthy,
I shall call omniscient Ukko,
Mightiest of the creators,
Stronger than all ancient heroes,
Wiser than the world-magicians;
He will check the crimson out-flow,
He will heal this wound of hatchet.

“Ukko, God of love and mercy,
God and Master of the heavens,
Come thou hither, thou art needed,
Come thou quickly I beseech thee,
Lend thy hand to aid thy children,
Touch this wound with healing fingers,
Stop this hero’s streaming life-blood,
Bind this wound with tender leaflets,
Mingle with them healing flowers,
Thus to check this crimson current,
Thus to save this great magician,
Save the life of Wainamoinen.”

Thus at last the blood-stream ended,
As the magic words were spoken.
Then the gray-beard, much rejoicing,
Sent his young son to the smithy,
There to make a healing balsam,
From the herbs of tender fibre,
From the healing plants and flowers,
From the stalks secreting honey,
From the roots, and leaves, and blossoms.

On the way he meets an oak-tree,
And the oak the son addresses:
“Hast thou honey in thy branches,
Does thy sap run full of sweetness?”
Thus the oak-tree wisely answers:
“Yea, but last night dripped the honey
Down upon my spreading branches,
And the clouds their fragrance sifted,
Sifted honey on my leaflets,
From their home within the heavens.”

Then the son takes oak-wood splinters,
Takes the youngest oak-tree branches,
Gathers many healing grasses,
Gathers many herbs and flowers,
Rarest herbs that grow in Northland,
Places them within the furnace
In a kettle made of copper;
Lets them steep and boil together,
Bits of bark chipped from the oak-tree,
Many herbs of healing virtues;
Steeps them one day, then a second,
Three long days of summer weather,
Days and nights in quick succession;
Then he tries his magic balsam,
Looks to see if it is ready,
If his remedy is finished;
But the balsam is unworthy.

Then he added other grasses,
Herbs of every healing virtue,
That were brought from distant nations,
Many hundred leagues from Northland,
Gathered by the wisest minstrels,
Thither brought by nine enchanters.
Three days more he steeped the balsam,
Three nights more the fire he tended,
Nine the days and nights he watched it,
Then again he tried the ointment,
Viewed it carefully and tested,
Found at last that it was ready,
Found the magic balm was finished.

Near by stood a branching birch-tree,
On the border of the meadow,
Wickedly it had been broken,
Broken down by evil Hisi;
Quick he takes his balm of healing,
And anoints the broken branches,
Rubs the balsam in the fractures,
Thus addresses then the birch-tree:
“With this balsam I anoint thee,
With this salve thy wounds I cover,
Cover well thine injured places;
Now the birch-tree shall recover,
Grow more beautiful than ever.”

True, the birch-tree soon recovered,
Grew more beautiful than ever,
Grew more uniform its branches,
And its bole more strong and stately.
Thus it was he tried the balsam,
Thus the magic salve he tested,
Touched with it the splintered sandstone,
Touched the broken blocks of granite,
Touched the fissures in the mountains,
And the broken parts united,
All the fragments grew together.

Then the young boy quick returning
With the balsam he had finished,
To the gray-beard gave the ointment,
And the boy these measures uttered:
“Here I bring the balm of healing,
Wonderful the salve I bring thee;
It will join the broken granite,
Make the fragments grow together,
Heat the fissures in the mountains,
And restore the injured birch-tree.”

With his tongue the old man tested,
Tested thus the magic balsam,
Found the remedy effective,
Found the balm had magic virtues;
Then anointed he the minstrel,
Touched the wounds of Wainamoinen,
Touched them with his magic balsam,
With the balm of many virtues;
Speaking words of ancient wisdom,
These the words the gray-beard uttered:
“Do not walk in thine own virtue,
Do not work in thine own power,
Walk in strength of thy Creator;
Do not speak in thine own wisdom,
Speak with tongue of mighty Ukko.
In my mouth, if there be sweetness,
It has come from my Creator;
If my hands are filled with beauty,
All the beauty comes from Ukko.”

When the wounds had been anointed,
When the magic salve had touched them,
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen
Suffered fearful pain and anguish,
Sank upon the floor in torment,
Turning one way, then another,
Sought for rest and found it nowhere,
Till his pain the gray-beard banished,
Banished by the aid of magic,
Drove away his killing torment
To the court of all our trouble,
To the highest hill of torture,
To the distant rocks and ledges,
To the evil-bearing mountains,
To the realm of wicked Hisi.
Then he took some silken fabric,
Quick he tore the silk asunder,
Making equal strips for wrapping,
Tied the ends with silken ribbons,
Making thus a healing bandage;
Then he wrapped with skilful fingers
Wainamoinen’s knee and ankle,
Wrapped the wounds of the magician,
And this prayer the gray-beard uttered
“Ukko’s fabric is the bandage,
Ukko’s science is the surgeon,
These have served the wounded hero,
Wrapped the wounds of the magician.
Look upon us, God of mercy,
Come and guard us, kind Creator,
And protect us from all evil!
Guide our feet lest they may stumble,
Guard our lives from every danger,
From the wicked wilds of Hisi.”

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Felt the mighty aid of magic,
Felt the help of gracious Ukko,
Straightway stronger grew in body,
Straightway were the wounds united,
Quick the fearful pain departed.
Strong and hardy grew the hero,
Straightway walked in perfect freedom,
Turned his knee in all directions,
Knowing neither pain nor trouble.

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Raised his eyes to high Jumala,
Looked with gratitude to heaven,
Looked on high, in joy and gladness,
Then addressed omniscient Ukko,
This the prayer the minstrel uttered:
“O be praised, thou God of mercy,
Let me praise thee, my Creator,
Since thou gavest me assistance,
And vouchsafed me thy protection,
Healed my wounds and stilled mine anguish,
Banished all my pain and trouble,
Caused by Iron and by Hisi.
O, ye people of Wainola,
People of this generation,
And the folk of future ages,
Fashion not in emulation,
River boat, nor ocean shallop,
Boasting of its fine appearance;
God alone can work completion,
Give to cause its perfect ending,
Never hand of man can find it,
Never can the hero give it,
Ukko is the only Master.”




RUNE X.
ILMARINEN FORGES THE SAMPO.


Wainamoinen, the magician,
Takes his steed of copper color,
Hitches quick his fleet-foot courser,
Puts his racer to the snow-sledge,
Straightway springs upon the cross-seat,
Snaps his whip adorned with jewels.
Like the winds the steed flies onward,
Like a lightning flash, the racer
Makes the snow-sledge creak and rattle,
Makes the highway quickly vanish,
Dashes on through fen and forest,
Over hills and through the valleys,
Over marshes, over mountains,
Over fertile plains and meadows;
Journeys one day, then a second,
So a third from morn till evening,
Till the third day evening brings him
To the endless bridge of Osmo,
To the Osmo-fields and pastures,
To the plains of Kalevala;
When the hero spake as follows:
“May the wolves devour the dreamer,
Eat the Laplander for dinner,
May disease destroy the braggart,
Him who said that I should never
See again my much-loved home-land,
Nevermore behold my kindred,
Never during all my life-time,
Never while the sunshine brightens,
Never while the moonlight glimmers
On the meadows of Wainola,
On the plains of Kalevala.”

Then began old Wainamoinen,
Ancient bard and famous singer,
To renew his incantations;
Sang aloft a wondrous pine-tree,
Till it pierced the clouds in growing
With its golden top and branches,
Till it touched the very heavens,
Spread its branches in the ether,
In the ever-shining sunlight.

Now he sings again enchanting,
Sings the Moon to shine forever
In the fir-tree’s emerald branches;
In its top he sings the Great Bear.
Then he quickly journeys homeward,
Hastens to his golden portals,
Head awry and visage wrinkled,
Crooked cap upon his forehead,
Since as ransom he had promised
Ilmarinen, magic artist,
Thus to save his life from torture
On the distant fields of Northland,
In the dismal Sariola.

When his stallion he had halted
On the Osmo-field and meadow,
Quickly rising in his snow-sledge,
The magician heard one knocking,
Breaking coal within the smithy,
Beating with a heavy hammer.
Wainamoinen, famous minstrel,
Entering the smithy straightway,
Found the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Knocking with his copper hammer.
Ilmarinen spake as follows:
“Welcome, brother Wainamoinen,
Old and worthy Wainamoinen!
Why so long hast thou been absent,
Where hast thou so long been hiding?”

Wainamoinen then made answer,
These the words of the magician:
“Long indeed have I been living,
Many dreary days have wandered,
Many cheerless nights have lingered,
Floating on the cruel ocean,
Weeping in the fens and woodlands
Of the never-pleasant Northland,
In the dismal Sariola;
With the Laplanders I’ve wandered,
With the people filled with witchcraft.”

Promptly answers Ilmarinen,
These the words the blacksmith uses:
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Famous and eternal singer,
Tell me of thy journey northward,
Of thy wanderings in Lapland,
Of thy dismal journey homeward.”
Spake the minstrel, Wainamoinen:
“I have much to tell thee, brother,
Listen to my wondrous story:
In the Northland lives a virgin,
In a village there, a maiden,
That will not accept a lover,
That a hero’s hand refuses,
That a wizard’s heart disdaineth;
All of Northland sings her praises,
Sings her worth and magic beauty,
Fairest maiden of Pohyola,
Daughter of the earth and ocean.
From her temples beams the moonlight,
From her breast, the gleam of sunshine,
From her forehead shines the rainbow,
On her neck, the seven starlets,
And the Great Bear from her shoulder.

“Ilmarinen, worthy brother,
Thou the only skilful blacksmith,
Go and see her wondrous beauty,
See her gold and silver garments,
See her robed in finest raiment,
See her sitting on the rainbow,
Walking on the clouds of purple.
Forge for her the magic Sampo,
Forge the lid in many colors,
Thy reward shall be the virgin,
Thou shalt win this bride of beauty;
Go and bring the lovely maiden
To thy home in Kalevala.”
Spake the brother, Ilmarinen:
“O thou cunning Wainamoinen,
Thou hast promised me already
To the ever-darksome Northland,
Thy devoted head to ransom,
Thus to rescue thee from trouble.
I shall never visit Northland,
Shall not go to see thy maiden,
Do not love the Bride of Beauty;
Never while the moonlight glimmers,
Shall I go to dreary Pohya,
To the plains of Sariola,
Where the people eat each other,
Sink their heroes in the ocean,
Not for all the maids of Lapland.”
Spake the brother, Wainamoinen:
“I can tell thee greater wonders,
Listen to my wondrous story:
I have seen the fir-tree blossom,
Seen its flowers with emerald branches,
On the Osmo-fields and woodlands;
In its top, there shines the moonlight,
And the Bear lives in its branches.”
Ilmarinen thus made answer:
“I cannot believe thy story,
Cannot trust thy tale of wonder,
Till I see the blooming fir-tree,
With its many emerald branches,
With its Bear and golden moonlight.”
This is Wainamoinen’s answer:
“Wilt thou not believe my story?
Come with me and I will show thee
If my lips speak fact or fiction.”

Quick they journey to discover,
Haste to view the wondrous fir-tree;
Wainamoinen leads the journey,
Ilmarinen closely follows.
As they near the Osmo-borders,
Ilmarinen hastens forward
That he may behold the wonder,
Spies the Bear within the fir-top,
Sitting on its emerald branches,
Spies the gleam of golden moonlight.

Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:,
These the words the singer uttered:
“Climb this tree, dear Ilmarinen,
And bring down the golden moonbeams,
Bring the Moon and Bear down with thee
From the fir-tree’s lofty branches.”

Ilmarinen, full consenting,
Straightway climbed the golden fir-tree,
High upon the bow of heaven,
Thence to bring the golden moonbeams,
Thence to bring the Bear of heaven,
From the fir-tree’s topmost branches.

Thereupon the blooming fir-tree
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:
“O thou senseless, thoughtless hero,
Thou hast neither wit nor instinct;
Thou dost climb my golden branches,
Like a thing of little judgment,
Thus to get my pictured moonbeams,
Take away my silver starlight,
Steal my Bear and blooming branches.”

Quick as thought old Wainamoinen
Sang again in magic accents,
Sang a storm-wind in the heavens,
Sang the wild winds into fury,
And the singer spake as follows:
“Take, O storm-wind, take the forgeman,
Carry him within thy vessel,
Quickly hence, and land the hero
On the ever-darksome Northland,
On the dismal Sariola.”

Now the storm-wind quickly darkens,
Quickly piles the air together,
Makes of air a sailing vessel,
Takes the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Fleetly from the fir-tree branches,
Toward the never-pleasant Northland,
Toward the dismal Sariola.
Through the air sailed Ilmarinen,
Fast and far the hero travelled,
Sweeping onward, sailing northward,
Riding in the track of storm-winds,
O’er the Moon, beneath the sunshine,
On the broad back of the Great Bear,
Till he neared Pohyola’s woodlands,
Neared the homes of Sariola,
And alighted undiscovered,
Was not noticed by the hunters,
Was not scented by the watch-dogs.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Ancient, toothless dame of Northland,
Standing in the open court-yard,
Thus addresses Ilmarinen,
As she spies the hero-stranger:
“Who art thou of ancient heroes,
Who of all the host of heroes,
Coming here upon the storm-wind,
O’er the sledge-path of the ether,
Scented not by Pohya’s watch-dogs?”
This is Ilmarinen’s answer:
“I have surely not come hither
To be barked at by the watch-dogs,
At these unfamiliar portals,
At the gates of Sariola.”

Thereupon the Northland hostess
Asks again the hero-stranger:
“Hast thou ever been acquainted
With the blacksmith of Wainola,
With the hero, Ilmarinen,
With the skilful smith and artist?
Long I’ve waited for his coming,
Long this one has been expected,
On the borders of the Northland,
Here to forge for me the Sampo.”
Spake the hero, Ilmarinen:
“Well indeed am I acquainted
With the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
I myself am Ilmarinen,
I, the skilful smith and artist.”

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Toothless dame of Sariola,
Straightway rushes to her dwelling,
These the words that Louhi utters:
“Come, thou youngest of my daughters,
Come, thou fairest of my maidens,
Dress thyself in finest raiment,
Deck thy hair with rarest jewels,
Pearls upon thy swelling bosom,
On thy neck, a golden necklace,
Bind thy head with silken ribbons,
Make thy cheeks look fresh and ruddy,
And thy visage fair and winsome,
Since the artist, Ilmarinen,
Hither comes from Kalevala,
Here to forge for us the Sampo,
Hammer us the lid in colors.”

Now the daughter of the Northland,
Honored by the land and water,
Straightway takes her choicest raiment,
Takes her dresses rich in beauty,
Finest of her silken wardrobe,
Now adjusts her silken fillet,
On her brow a band of copper,
Round her waist a golden girdle,
Round her neck a pearly necklace,
Shining gold upon her bosom,
In her hair the threads of silver.
From her dressing-room she hastens,
To the hall she hastes and listens,
Full of beauty, full of joyance,
Ears erect and eyes bright-beaming,
Ruddy cheeks and charming visage,
Waiting for the hero-stranger.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Leads the hero, Ilmarinen,
To her dwelling-rooms in Northland,
To her home in Sariola,
Seats him at her well-filled table,
Gives to him the finest viands,
Gives him every needed comfort,
Then addresses him as follows:
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Master of the forge and smithy,
Canst thou forge for me the Sampo,
Hammer me the lid in colors,
From the tips of white-swan feathers,
From the milk of greatest virtue,
From a single grain of barley,
From the finest wool of lambkins?
Thou shalt have my fairest daughter,
Recompense for this thy service.”
These the words of Ilmarinen:
“I will forge for thee the Sampo,
Hammer thee the lid in colors,
From the tips of white-swan feathers,
From the milk of greatest virtue,
From a single grain of barley,
From the finest wool of lambkins,
Since I forged the arch of heaven,
Forged the air a concave cover,
Ere the earth had a beginning.”

Thereupon the magic blacksmith
Went to forge the wondrous Sampo,
Went to find a blacksmith’s workshop,
Went to find the tools to work with;
But he found no place for forging,
Found no smithy, found no bellows,
Found no chimney, found no anvil,
Found no tongs, and found no hammer.

Then the artist, Ilmarinen.
Spake these words, soliloquizing:
“Only women grow discouraged,
Only knaves leave work unfinished,
Not the devils, nor the heroes,
Nor the Gods of greater knowledge.”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Sought a place to build a smithy,
Sought a place to plant a bellows,
On the borders of the Northland,
On the Pohya-hills and meadows;
Searched one day, and then a second;
Ere the evening of the third day,
Came a rock within his vision,
Came a stone with rainbow-colors.
There the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Set at work to build his smithy,
Built a fire and raised a chimney;
On the next day laid his bellows,
On the third day built his furnace,
And began to forge the Sampo.

The eternal magic artist,
Ancient blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
First of all the iron-workers,
Mixed together certain metals,
Put the mixture in the caldron,
Laid it deep within the furnace,
Called the hirelings to the forging.
Skilfully they work the bellows,
Tend the fire and add the fuel,
Three most lovely days of summer,
Three short nights of bright midsummer,
Till the rocks begin to blossom,
In the foot-prints of the workmen,
From the magic heat and furnace.

On the first day, Ilmarinen
Downward bent and well examined,
On the bottom of his furnace,
Thus to see what might be forming
From the magic fire and metals.
From the fire arose a cross-bow,
With the brightness of the moonbeams,
Golden bow with tips of silver;
On the shaft was shining copper,
And the bow was strong and wondrous,
But alas! it was ill-natured,
Asking for a hero daily,
Two the heads it asked on feast-days.

Ilmarinen, skilful artist,
Was not pleased with this creation,
Broke the bow in many pieces,
Threw them back within the furnace,
Kept the workmen at the bellows,
Tried to forge the magic Sampo.

On the second day, the blacksmith
Downward bent and well examined,
On the bottom of the furnace;
From the fire, a skiff of metals,
Came a boat of purple color,
All the ribs were colored golden,
And the oars were forged from copper;
Thus the skiff was full of beauty,
But alas! a thing of evil;
Forth it rushes into trouble,
Hastens into every quarrel,
Hastes without a provocation
Into every evil combat.

Ilmarinen, metal artist,
Is not pleased with this creation,
Breaks the skiff in many fragments,
Throws them back within the furnace,
Keeps the workmen at the bellows,
Thus to forge the magic Sampo.

On the third day, Ilmarinen,
First of all the metal-workers,
Downward bent and well examined,
On the bottom of the furnace;
There he saw a heifer rising,
Golden were the horns of Kimmo,
On her head the Bear of heaven,
On her brow a disc of sunshine,
Beautiful the cow of magic;
But alas! she is ill-tempered,
Rushes headlong through the forest,
Rushes through the swamps and meadows,
Wasting all her milk in running.

Ilmarinen, the magician,
Is not pleased with this creation,
Cuts the magic cow in pieces,
Throws them in the fiery furnace,
Sets the workmen at the bellows,
Thus to forge the magic Sampo.

On the fourth day, Ilmarinen
Downward bent and well examined,
To the bottom of the furnace;
There beheld a plow in beauty
Rising from the fire of metals,
Golden was the point and plowshare,
And the beam was forged from copper,
And the handles, molten silver,
Beautiful the plow and wondrous;
But alas! it is ill-mannered,
Plows up fields of corn and barley,
Furrows through the richest meadows.

Ilmarinen, metal artist,
Is not pleased with this creation,
Quickly breaks the plow in pieces,
Throws them back within the furnace,
Lets the winds attend the bellows,
Lets the storm-winds fire the metals.
Fiercely vie the winds of heaven,
East-wind rushing, West-wind roaring,
South-wind crying, North-wind howling,
Blow one day and then a second,
Blow the third from morn till even,
When the fire leaps through the windows,
Through the door the sparks fly upward,
Clouds of smoke arise to heaven;
With the clouds the black smoke mingles,
As the storm-winds ply the bellows.

On the third night Ilmarinen,
Bending low to view his metals,
On the bottom of the furnace,
Sees the magic Sampo rising,
Sees the lid in many colors.
Quick the artist of Wainola
Forges with the tongs and anvil,
Knocking with a heavy hammer,
Forges skilfully the Sampo;
On one side the flour is grinding,
On another salt is making,
On a third is money forging,
And the lid is many-colored.
Well the Sampo grinds when finished,
To and fro the lid in rocking,
Grinds one measure at the day-break,
Grinds a measure fit for eating,
Grinds a second for the market,
Grinds a third one for the store-house.

Joyfully the dame of Northland,
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Takes away the magic Sampo,
To the hills of Sariola,
To the copper-bearing mountains,
Puts nine locks upon the wonder,
Makes three strong roots creep around it;
In the earth they grow nine fathoms,
One large root beneath the mountain,
One beneath the sandy sea-bed,
One beneath the mountain-dwelling.

Modestly pleads Ilmarinen
For the maiden’s willing answer,
These the words of the magician:
“Wilt thou come with me, fair maiden,
Be my wife and queen forever?
I have forged for thee the Sampo,
Forged the lid in many colors.”

Northland’s fair and lovely daughter
Answers thus the metal-worker:
“Who will in the coming spring-time,
Who will in the second summer,
Guide the cuckoo’s song and echo?
Who will listen to his calling,
Who will sing with him in autumn,
Should I go to distant regions,
Should this cheery maiden vanish
From the fields of Sariola,
From Pohyola’s fens and forests,
Where the cuckoo sings and echoes?
Should I leave my father’s dwelling,
Should my mother’s berry vanish,
Should these mountains lose their cherry,
Then the cuckoo too would vanish,
All the birds would leave the forest,
Leave the summit of the mountain,
Leave my native fields and woodlands,
Never shall I, in my life-time,
Say farewell to maiden freedom,
Nor to summer cares and labors,
Lest the harvest be ungarnered,
Lest the berries be ungathered,
Lest the song-birds leave the forest,
Lest the mermaids leave the waters,
Lest I sing with them no longer.”

Ilmarinen, the magician,
The eternal metal-forger,
Cap awry and head dejected,
Disappointed, heavy-hearted,
Empty-handed, well considers,
How to reach his distant country,
Reach his much-loved home and kinded,
Gain the meadows of Wainola,
From the never-pleasant Northland,
From the darksome Sariola.
Louhi thus addressed the suitor:
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Why art thou so heavy-hearted,
Why thy visage so dejected?
Hast thou in thy mind to journey
From the vales and hills of Pohya,
To the meadows of Wainola,
To thy home in Kalevala?”
This is Ilmarinen’s answer:
“Thitherward my mind is tending,
To my home-land let me journey,
With my kindred let me linger,
Be at rest in mine own country.”

Straightway Louhi, dame of Northland,
Gave the hero every comfort,
Gave him food and rarest viands,
Placed him in a boat of copper,
In a copper-banded vessel,
Called the winds to his assistance,
Made the North-wind guide him homeward.
Thus the skilful Ilmarinen
Travels toward his native country,
On the blue back of the waters,
Travels one day, then a second,
Till the third day evening brings him
To Wainola’s peaceful meadows,
To his home in Kalevala.

Straightway ancient Wainamoinen
Thus addresses Ilmarinen:
“O my brother, metal-artist,
Thou eternal wonder-worker,
Didst thou forge the magic Sampo,
Forge the lid in many colors?”

Spake the brother, Ilmarinen,
These the words the master uttered:
“Yea, I forged the magic Sampo,
Forged the lid in many colors;
To and fro the lid in rocking
Grinds one measure at the day-dawn,
Grinds a measure fit for eating,
Grinds a second for the market,
Grinds a third one for the store-house.
Louhi has the wondrous Sampo,
I have not the Bride of Beauty.”




RUNE XI.
LEMMINKAINEN’S LAMENT.


This the time to sing of Ahti,
Son of Lempo, Kaukomieli,
Also known as Lemminkainen.
Ahti was the king of islands,
Grew amid the island-dwellings,
At the site of his dear mother,
On the borders of the ocean,
On the points of promontories.
Ahti fed upon the salmon,
Fed upon the ocean whiting,
Thus became a mighty hero,
In his veins the blood of ages,
Head erect and form commanding,
Growth of mind and body perfect;
But alas! he had his failings,
Bad indeed his heart and morals,
Roaming in unworthy places,
Staying days and nights in sequence
At the homes of merry maidens,
At the dances of the virgins,
With the maids of braided tresses.

Up in Sahri lived a maiden,
Lived the fair and winsome Kulli,
Lovely as a summer-flower,
From a kingly house descended,
Grew to perfect form and beauty,
Living in her father’s cottage,
Home of many ancient heroes;
Beautiful was she and queenly,
Praised throughout the whole of Ehstland;
From afar men came to woo her,
To the birthplace of the virgin,
To the household of her mother.

For his son the Day-star wooes her,
But she will not go to Sun-land,
Will not shine beside the Day-star,
In his haste to bring the summer.
For her son, the bright Moon wooes her,
But she will not go to Moon-land,
By the bright Moon will not glimmer,
Will not run through boundless ether.

For his son the Night-star wooes her,
But she will not go to Star-land,
Will not twinkle in the starlight,
Through the dreary nights in winter.

Lovers come from distant Ehstland,
Others come from far-off Ingern,
But they cannot win the maiden,
This the answer that she gives them
“Vainly are your praises lavished
Vainly is your silver offered,
Wealth and praise are no temptation;
Never shall I go to Ehstland,
Never shall I go a-rowing
On the waters of the Ingern,
Shall not cross the Sahri-waters,
Never eat the fish of Ehstland,
Never taste the Ehstland viands.
Ingerland shall never see me,
Will not row upon her rivers,
Will not step within her borders;
Hunger there, and fell starvation,
Wood is absent, fuel wanting,
Neither water, wheat, nor barley,
Even rye is not abundant.”

Lemminkainen of the islands,
Warlike hero, Kaukomieli,
Undertakes to win the maiden,
Woo and win the Sahri-flower,
Win a bride so highly honored,
Win the maid with golden tresses,
Win the Sahri maid of beauty;
But his mother gives him warning:
“Nay,” replies his gray-haired mother,
“Do not woo, my son beloved,
Maiden of a higher station;
She will never make thee happy
With her lineage of Sahri.”

Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,
These the words of Kaukomieli:
“Should I come from lowly station,
Though my tribe is not the highest,
I shall woo to please my fancy,
Woo the maiden fair and lovely,
Choose a wife for worth and beauty.”
This the anxious mother’s answer:
“Lemminkainen, son beloved,
Listen to advice maternal:
Do not go to distant Sahri,
To her tribe of many branches;
All the maidens there will taunt thee,
All the women will deride thee.”

Lemminkainen, little hearing,
Answers thus his mother’s pleading:
“I will still the sneers of women,
Silence all the taunts of maidens,
I will crush their haughty bosoms,
Smite the hands and cheeks of infants;
Surely this will check their insults,
Fitting ending to derision!”
This the answer of the mother:
“Woe is me, my son beloved!
Woe is me, my life hard-fated!
Shouldst thou taunt the Sahri daughters,
Or insult the maids of virtue,
Shouldst thou laugh them to derision,
There will rise a great contention,
Fierce the battle that will follow.
All the hosts of Sahri-suitors,
Armed in thousands will attack thee,
And will slay thee for thy folly.”

Nothing listing, Lemminkainen,
Heeding not his mother’s warning,
Led his war-horse from the stables,
Quickly hitched the fiery charger,
Fleetly drove upon his journey,
To the distant Sahri-village,
There to woo the Sahri-flower,
There to win the Bride of Beauty.

All the aged Sahri-women,
All the young and lovely maidens
Laughed to scorn the coming stranger
Driving careless through the alleys,
Wildly driving through the court-yard,
Now upsetting in the gate-way,
Breaking shaft, and hame, and runner.

Then the fearless Lemminkainen,
Mouth awry and visage wrinkled,
Shook his sable locks and answered:
“Never in my recollection
Have I heard or seen such treatment,
Never have I been derided,
Never suffered sneers of women,
Never suffered scorn of virgins,
Not in my immortal life-time.
Is there any place befitting
On the Sahri-plains and pastures,
Where to join in songs and dances?
Is there here a hall for pleasure,
Where the Sahri-maidens linger,
Merry maids with braided tresses?”

Thereupon the Sahri-maidens
Answered from their promontory:
“Room enough is there in Sahri,
Room upon the Sahri-pastures,
Room for pleasure-halls and dances;
Sing and dance upon our meadows,
Be a shepherd on the mountains,
Shepherd-boys have room for dancing;
Indolent the Sahri-children,
But the colts are fat and frisky.”

Little caring, Lemminkainen
Entered service there as shepherd,
In the daytime on the pastures,
In the evening, making merry
At the games of lively maidens,
At the dances with the virgins,
With the maids with braided tresses.
Thus it was that Lemminkainen,
Thus the shepherd, Kaukomieli,
Quickly hushed the women’s laughter,
Quickly quenched the taunts of maidens,
Quickly silenced their derision.
All the dames and Sahri-daughters
Soon were feasting Lemminkainen,
At his side they danced and lingered.
Only was there one among them,
One among the Sahri-virgins,
Harbored neither love nor wooers,
Favored neither gods nor heroes,
This the lovely maid Kyllikki,
This the Sahri’s fairest flower.
Lemminkainen, full of pleasure,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Rowed a hundred boats in pieces,
Pulled a thousand oars to fragments,
While he wooed the Maid of Beauty,
Tried to win the fair Kyllikki.

Finally the lovely maiden,
Fairest daughter of the Northland,
Thus addresses Lemminkainen:
“Why dost linger here, thou weak one,
Why dost murmur on these borders,
Why come wooing at my fireside,
Wooing me in belt of copper?
Have no time to waste upon thee,
Rather give this stone its polish,
Rather would I turn the pestle
In the heavy sandstone mortar;
Rather sit beside my mother
In the dwellings of my father.
Never shall I heed thy wooing,
Neither wights nor whisks I care for,
Sooner have a slender husband
Since I have a slender body;
Wish to have him fine of figure,
Since perchance I am well-shapen;
Wish to have him tall and stately,
Since my form perchance is queenly;
Never waste thy time in wooing
Sahri’s maid and favored flower.”

Time had gone but little distance,
Scarcely had a month passed over,
When upon a merry evening,
Where the maidens meet for dancing,
In the glen beyond the meadow,
On a level patch of verdure,
Came too soon the maid Kyllikki,
Sahri’s pride, the Maid of Beauty;
Quickly followed Lemminkainen,
With his stallion proudly prancing,
Fleetest racer of the Northland,
Fleetly drives beyond the meadow,
Where the maidens meet for dancing,
Snatches quick the maid Kyllikki,
On the settle seats the maiden,
Quickly draws the leathern cover,
And adjusts the brichen cross-bar,
Whips his courser to a gallop.
With a rush, and roar, and rattle,
Speeds he homeward like the storm-wind,
Speaks these words to those that listen:
“Never, never, anxious maidens,
Must ye give the information,
That I carried off Kyllikki
To my distant home and kindred.
If ye do not heed this order,
Ye shall badly fare as maidens;
I shall sing to war your suitors,
Sing them under spear and broadsword,
That for months, and years, and ages,
Never ye will see their faces,
Never hear their merry voices,
Never will they tread these uplands,
Never will they join these dances,
Never will they drive these highways.”

Sad the wailing of Kyllikki,
Sad the weeping flower of Sahri!
Listen to her tearful pleading:
“Give, O give me back my freedom,
Free me from the throes of thralldom,
Let this maiden wander homeward,
By some foot-path let me wander
To my father who is grieving,
To my mother who is weeping;
Let me go or I will curse thee!
If thou wilt not give me freedom,
Wilt not let me wander homeward,
Where my loved ones wait my coming,
I have seven stalwart brothers,
Seven sons of father’s brother,
Seven sons of mother’s sister,
Who pursue the tracks of red-deer,
Hunt the hare upon the heather;
They will follow thee and slay thee,
Thus I’ll gain my wished-for freedom.”

Lemminkainen, little heeding,
Would not grant the maiden’s wishes,
Would not heed her plea for mercy.

Spake again the waiting virgin,
Pride and beauty of the Northland:
“Joyful was I with my kindred,
Joyful born and softly nurtured;
Merrily I spent my childhood,
Happy I, in virgin-freedom,
In the dwelling of my father,
By the bedside of my mother,
With my lineage in Sahri;
But alas! all joy has vanished,
All my happiness departed,
All my maiden beauty waneth
Since I met thine evil spirit,
Shameless hero of dishonor,
Cruel fighter of the islands,
Merciless in civil combat.”

Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,
These the words of Kaukomieli:
“Dearest maiden, fair Kyllikki,
My sweet strawberry of Pohya,
Still thine anguish, cease thy weeping,
Be thou free from care and sorrow,
Never shall I do thee evil,
Never will my hands maltreat thee,
Never will mine arms abuse thee,
Never will my tongue revile thee,
Never will my heart deceive thee.

“Tell me why thou hast this anguish,
Why thou hast this bitter sorrow,
Why this sighing and lamenting,
Tell me why this wail of sadness?
Banish all thy cares and sorrows,
Dry thy tears and still thine anguish,
I have cattle, food, and shelter,
I have home, and friends, and kindred,
Kine upon the plains and uplands,
In the marshes berries plenty,
Strawberries upon the mountains;
I have kine that need no milking,
Handsome kine that need no feeding,
Beautiful if not well-tended;
Need not tie them up at evening,
Need not free them in the morning,
Need not hunt them, need not feed them,
Need not give them salt nor water.

“Thinkest thou my race is lowly,
Dost thou think me born ignoble,
Does my lineage agrieve thee?
Was not born in lofty station,
From a tribe of noble heroes,
From a worthy race descended;
But I have a sword of fervor,
And a spear yet filled with courage,
Surely these are well descended,
These were born from hero-races,
Sharpened by the mighty Hisi,
By the gods were forged and burnished;
Therefore will I give thee greatness,
Greatness of my race and nation,
With my broadsword filled with fervor,
With my spear still filled with courage.”

Anxiously the sighing maiden
Thus addresses Lemminkainen:
“O thou Ahti, son of Lempo,
Wilt thou take this trusting virgin,
As thy faithful life-companion,
Take me under thy protection,
Be to me a faithful husband,
Swear to me an oath of honor,
That thou wilt not go to battle,
When for gold thou hast a longing,
When thou wishest gold and silver?”
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:
“I will swear an oath of honor,
That I’ll never go to battle,
When for gold I feel a longing,
When I wish for gold and silver.
Swear thou also on thine honor,
Thou wilt go not to the village,
When desire for dance impels thee,
Wilt not visit village-dances.”

Thus the two made oath together,
Registered their vows in heaven,
Vowed before omniscient Ukko,
Ne’er to go to war vowed Ahti,
Never to the dance, Kyllikki.

Lemminkainen, full of joyance,
Snapped his whip above his courser,
Whipped his racer to a gallop,
And these words the hero uttered:
“Fare ye well, ye Sahri-meadows,
Roots of firs, and stumps of birch-trees.
That I wandered through in summer,
That I travelled o’er in winter,
Where ofttimes in rainy seasons,
At the evening hour I lingered,
When I sought to win the virgin,
Sought to win the Maid of Beauty,
Fairest of the Sahri-flowers.
Fare ye well, ye Sahri-woodlands,
Seas and oceans, lakes and rivers,
Vales and mountains, isles and inlets,
Once the home of fair Kyllikki!”

Quick the racer galloped homeward,
Galloped on along the highway,
Toward the meadows of Wainola,
To the plains of Kalevala.

As they neared the Ahti-dwellings,
Thus Kyllikki spake in sorrow:
“Cold and drear is thy cottage,
Seeming like a place deserted;
Who may own this dismal cabin,
Who the one so little honored?”

Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,
These the words that Ahti uttered:
“Do not grieve about my cottage,
Have no care about my chambers;
I shall build thee other dwellings,
I shall fashion them much better,
Beams, and posts, and sills, and rafters,
Fashioned from the sacred birch-wood.”

Now they reach the home of Ahti,
Lemminkainen’s home and birthplace,
Enter they his mother’s cottage;
There they meet his aged mother,
These the words the mother uses:
“Long indeed hast thou been absent,
Long in foreign lands hast wandered,
Long in Sahri thou hast lingered!”
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:
“All the host of Sahri-women,
All the chaste and lovely maidens,
All the maids with braided tresses,
Well have paid for their derision,
For their scorn and for their laughter,
That they basely heaped upon me.
I have brought the best among them
In my sledge to this thy cottage;
Well I wrapped her in my fur-robes,
Kept her warm enwrapped in bear-skin,
Brought her to my mother’s dwelling,
As my faithful life-companion;
Thus I paid the scornful maidens,
Paid them well for their derision.

“Cherished mother of my being,
I have found the long-sought jewel,
I have won the Maid of Beauty.
Spread our couch with finest linen,
For our heads the softest pillows,
On our table rarest viands,
So that I may dwell in pleasure
With my spouse, the bride of honor,
With the pride of distant Sahri.”
This the answer of the mother:
“Be thou praised, O gracious Ukko,
Loudly praised, O thou Creator,
Since thou givest me a daughter,
Ahti’s bride, my second daughter,
Who can stir the fire at evening,
Who can weave me finest fabrics,
Who can twirl the useful spindle,
Who can rinse my silken ribbons,
Who can full the richest garments.

“Son beloved, praise thy Maker,
For the winning of this virgin,
Pride and joy of distant Sahri!
Kind indeed is thy Creator,
Wise the ever-knowing Ukko!
Pure the snow upon the mountains,
Purer still thy Bride of Beauty;
White the foam upon the ocean,
Whiter still her virgin-spirit;
Graceful on the lakes, the white-swan,
Still more graceful, thy companion;
Beautiful the stars in heaven,
Still more beautiful, Kyllikki.
Larger make our humble cottage,
Wider build the doors and windows,
Fashion thou the ceilings higher,
Decorate the walls in beauty,
Now that thou a bride hast taken
From a tribe of higher station,
Purest maiden of creation,
From the meadow-lands of Sahri,
From the upper shores of Northland.”




RUNE XII.
KYLLIKKI’S BROKEN VOW.


Lemminkainen, artful husband,
Reckless hero, Kaukomieli,
Constantly beside his young wife,
Passed his life in sweet contentment,
And the years rolled swiftly onward;
Ahti thought not of the battles,
Nor Kyllikki of the dances.

Once upon a time it happened
That the hero, Lemminkainen,
Went upon the lake a-fishing,
Was not home at early evening,
As the cruel night descended;
To the village went Kyllikki,
To the dance of merry maidens.

Who will tell the evil story,
Who will bear the information
To the husband, Lemminkainen?
Ahti’s sister tells the story,
And the sister’s name, Ainikki.

Soon she spreads the cruel tidings,
Straightway gives the information,
Of Kyllikki’s perjured honor,
These the words Ainikki utters:
“Ahti, my beloved brother,
To the village went Kyllikki,
To the hall of many strangers,
To the plays and village dances,
With the young men and the maidens,
With the maids of braided tresses,
To the halls of joy and pleasure.”

Lemminkainen, much dejected,
Broken-hearted, flushed with anger,
Spake these words in measured accents:
“Mother dear, my gray-haired mother,
Wilt thou straightway wash my linen
In the blood of poison-serpents,
In the black blood of the adder?
I must hasten to the combat,
To the camp-fires of the Northland,
To the battle-fields of Lapland;
To the village went Kyllikki,
To the play of merry maidens,
To the games and village dances,
With the maids of braided tresses.”
Straightway speaks the wife, Kyllikki:
“My beloved husband, Ahti,
Do not go to war, I pray thee.
In the evening I lay sleeping,
Slumbering I saw in dream-land
Fire upshooting from the chimney,
Flames arising, mounting skyward,
From the windows of this dwelling,
From the summits of these rafters,
Piercing through our upper chambers,
Roaring like the fall of waters,
Leaping from the floor and ceiling,
Darting from the halls and doorways.”

But the doubting Lemminkainen
Makes this answer to Kyllikki:
“I discredit dreams of women,
Have no faith in vows of maidens!
Faithful mother of my being,
Hither bring my mail of copper;
Strong desire is stirring in me
For the cup of deadly combat,
For the mead of martial conquest.”
This the pleading mother’s answer:
“Lemminkainen, son beloved,
Do not go to war I pray thee;
We have foaming beer abundant,
In our vessels beer of barley,
Held in casks by oaken spigots;
Drink this beer of peace and pleasure,
Let us drink of it together.”
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“I shall taste no more the viands,
In the home of false Kyllikki;
Rather would I drink the water
From the painted tips of birch-oars;
Sweeter far to me the water,
Than the beverage of dishonor,
At my mother’s home and fireside!

“Hither bring my martial doublet,
Bring me now the sword of battle,
Bring my father’s sword of honor;
I must go to upper Northland,
To the battle-fields of Lapland,
There to win me gold and silver.”
This the anxious mother’s answer:
“My beloved Kaukomieli,
We have gold in great abundance,
Gold and silver in the store-room;
Recently upon the uplands,
In the early hours of morning,
Toiled the workmen in the corn-fields,
Plowed the meadows filled with serpents,
When the plowshare raised the cover
From a chest of gold and silver,
Countless was the gold uncovered,
Hid beneath the grassy meadow;
This the treasure I have brought thee,
Take the countless gold in welcome.”
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“Do not wish thy household silver,
From the wars I’ll earn my silver;
Gold and silver from the combat
Are to me of greater value
Than the wealth thou hast discovered.
Bring me now my heavy armor,
Bring me too my spear and broadsword;
To the Northland I must hasten,
To the bloody wars of Lapland,
Thither does my pride impel me,
Thitherward my heart is turning.

“I have heard a tale of Lapland,
Some believe the wondrous story,
That a maid in Pimentola
Lives that does not care for suitors,
Does not care for bearded heroes.”
This the aged mother’s answer:
“Warlike Athi, son beloved,
In thy home thou hast Kyllikki,
Fairest wife of all the islands;
Strange to see two wives abiding
In the home of but one husband.”
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“To the village runs Kyllikki;
Let her run to village dances,
Let her sleep in other dwellings,
With the village youth find pleasure,
With the maids of braided tresses.”

Seeks the mother to detain him,
Thus the anxious mother answers:
“Do not go, my son beloved,
Ignorant of Pohya-witchcraft,
To the distant homes of Northland
Till thou hast the art of magic,
Till thou hast some little wisdom;
Do not go to fields of battle,
To the fires of Northland’s children,
To the slaughter-fields of Lapland,
Till of magic thou art master.
There the Lapland maids will charm thee,
Turyalanders will bewitch thee,
Sing thy visage into charcoal,
Head and shoulders to the furnace,
Into ashes sing thy fore-arm,
Into fire direct thy footsteps.”
Spake the warlike Lemminkainen:
“Wizards often have bewitched me,
And the fascinating serpents;
Lapland wizards, three in number,
On an eve in time of summer,
Sitting on a rock at twilight,
Not a garment to protect them,
Once bewitched me with their magic;
This much they have taken from me,
This the sum of all my losses:
What the hatchet gains from flint-stone,
What the auger bores from granite,
What the heel chips from the iceberg,
And what death purloins from tomb-stones.

“Horribly the wizards threatened,
Tried to sink me with their magic,
In the water of the marshes,
In the mud and treacherous quicksand,
To my chin in mire and water;
But I too was born a hero,
Born a hero and magician,
Was not troubled by their magic.

“Straightway I began my singing,
Sang the archers with their arrows,
Sang the spearmen with their weapons,
Sang the swordsmen with their poniards,
Sang the singers with their singing,
The enchanters with their magic,
To the rapids of the rivers,
To the highest fall of waters,
To the all-devouring whirlpool,
To the deepest depths of ocean,
Where the wizards still are sleeping,
Sleeping till the grass shoots upward
Through the beards and wrinkled faces,
Through the locks of the enchanters,
As they sleep beneath the billows.”

Still entreats the anxious mother,
Still beseeches Lemminkainen,
Trying to restrain the hero,
While Kyllikki begs forgiveness;
This the language of the mother:
“Do not go, my son beloved,
To the villages of Northland,
Nor to Lapland’s frigid borders;
Dire misfortune will befall thee,
Star of evil settle o’er thee,
Lemminkainen’s end, destruction.

“Couldst thou speak in tongues a hundred,
I could not believe thee able,
Through the magic of thy singing,
To enchant the sons of Lapland
To the bottom of the ocean;
Dost not know the Tury-language,
Canst but speak the tongue of Suomi,
Canst not win by witless magic.”

Lemminkainen, reckless hero,
Also known as Kaukomieli,
Stood beside his mother, combing
Out his sable locks and musing,
Brushing down his beard, debating,
Steadfast still in his decision,
Quickly hurls his brush in anger,
Hurls it to the wall opposing,
Gives his mother final answer,
These the words that Ahti uses:
“Dire misfortune will befall me,
Some sad fate will overtake me,
Evil come to Lemminkainen,
When the blood flows from that hair-brush,
When blood oozes from those bristles.”
Thus the warlike Lemminkainen
Goes to never-pleasant Lapland,
Heeding not his mother’s warning,
Heeding not her prohibition.

Thus the hero, Kaukomieli,
Quick equips himself for warfare,
On his head a copper helmet,
On his shoulders caps of copper,
On his body iron armor,
Steel, the belt around his body;
As he girds himself for battle,
Ahti thus soliloquizing:
“Strong the hero in his armor,
Strong indeed in copper helmet,
Powerful in mail of iron,
Stronger far than any hero
On the dismal shores of Lapland,
Need not fear their wise enchanters,
Need not fear their strongest foemen,
Need not fear a war with wizards.”

Grasped he then the sword of battle,
Firmly grasped the heavy broadsword
That Tuoni had been grinding,
That the gods had brightly burnished,
Thrust it in the leathern scabbard,
Tied the scabbard to his armor.

How do heroes guard from danger,
Where protect themselves from evil?
Heroes guard their homes and firesides,
Guard their doors, and roofs, and windows,
Guard the posts that hold the torch-lights,
Guard the highways to the court-yard,
Guard the ends of all the gate-ways.
Heroes guard themselves from women,
Carefully from merry maidens;
If in this their strength be wanting,
Easy fall the heroes, victims
To the snares of the enchanters.
Furthermore are heroes watchful
Of the tribes of warlike giants,
Where the highway doubly branches,
On the borders of the blue-rock,
On the marshes filled with evil,
Near the mighty fall of waters,
Near the circling of the whirlpool,
Near the fiery springs and rapids.
Spake the stout-heart, Lemminkainen:
“Rise ye heroes of the broadsword,
Ye, the earth’s eternal heroes,
From the deeps, ye sickle-bearers,
From the brooks, ye crossbow-shooters,
Come, thou forest, with thine archers,
Come, ye thickets, with your armies,
Mountain spirits, with your powers,
Come, fell Hisi, with thy horrors,
Water-mother, with thy dangers,
Come, Wellamo, with thy mermaids,
Come, ye maidens from the valleys,
Come, ye nymphs from winding rivers,
Be protection to this hero,
Be his day-and-night companions,
Body-guard to Lemminkainen,
Thus to blunt the spears of wizards,
Thus to dull their pointed arrows,
That the spears of the enchanters,
That the arrows of the archers,
That the weapons of the foemen,
May not harm this bearded hero.

“Should this force be insufficient,
I can call on other powers,
I can call the gods above me,
Call the great god of the heavens,
Him who gives the clouds their courses,
Him who rules through boundless ether,
Who directs the march of storm-winds.

“Ukko, thou O God above me,
Thou the father of creation,
Thou that speakest through the thunder,
Thou whose weapon is the lightning,
Thou whose voice is borne by ether,
Grant me now thy mighty fire-sword,
Give me here thy burning arrows,
Lightning arrows for my quiver,
Thus protect me from all danger,
Guard me from the wiles of witches,
Guide my feet from every evil,
Help me conquer the enchanters,
Help me drive them from the Northland;
Those that stand in front of battle,
Those that fill the ranks behind me,
Those around me, those above me,
Those beneath me, help me banish,
With their knives, and swords, and cross-bows,
With their spears of keenest temper,
With their tongues of evil magic;
Help me drive these Lapland wizards
To the deepest depths of ocean,
There to wrestle with Wellamo.”

Then the reckless Lemminkainen
Whistled loudly for his stallion,
Called the racer from the hurdles,
Called his brown steed from the pasture,
Threw the harness on the courser,
Hitched the fleet-foot to the snow-sledge,
Leaped upon the highest cross-bench,
Cracked his whip above the racer,
And the steed flies onward swiftly,
Bounds the sleigh upon its journey,
And the golden plain re-echoes;
Travels one day, then a second,
Travels all the next day northward,
Till the third day evening brings him
To a sorry Northland village,
On the dismal shores of Lapland.

Here the hero, Lemminkainen,
Drove along the lowest highway,
Through the streets along the border,
To a court-yard in the hamlet,
Asked one standing in the doorway:
“Is there one within this dwelling,
That can loose my stallion’s breastplate,
That can lift his heavy collar,
That these shafts can rightly lower?”

On the floor a babe was playing,
And the young child gave this answer:
“There is no one in this dwelling
That can loose thy stallion’s breastplate,
That can lift his heavy collar,
That the shafts can rightly lower.”

Lemminkainen, not discouraged,
Whips his racer to a gallop,
Rushes forward through the village,
On the middle of the highways,
To the court-yard in the centre,
Asks one standing in the threshold,
Leaning on the penthouse door-posts:
“Is there any one here dwelling
That can slip my stallion’s bridle,
That can loose his leathern breast-straps,
That can tend my royal racer?”

From the fire-place spake a wizard,
From her bench the witch made answer:
“Thou canst find one in this dwelling,
That can slip thy courser’s bridle,
That can loose his heavy breastplate,
That can tend thy royal racer.
There are here a thousand heroes
That can make thee hasten homeward,
That can give thee fleet-foot stallions,
That can chase thee to thy country,
Reckless rascal and magician,
To thy home and fellow minstrels,
To the uplands of thy father,
To the cabins of thy mother,
To the work-bench of thy brother,
To the dairy of thy sister,
Ere the evening star has risen,
Ere the sun retires to slumber.”

Lemminkainen, little fearing,
Gives this answer to the wizard:
“I should slay thee for thy pertness,
That thy clatter might be silenced.”

Then he whipped his fiery charger,
And the steed flew onward swiftly,
On the upper of the highways,
To the court-yard on the summit.

When the reckless Lemminkainen
Had approached the upper court-yard,
Uttered he the words that follow:
“O thou Hisi, stuff this watch-dog,
Lempo, stuff his throat and nostrils,
Close the mouth of this wild barker,
Bridle well the vicious canine,
That the watcher may be silent
While the hero passes by him.”

Then he stepped within the court-room,
With his whip he struck the flooring,
From the floor arose a vapor,
In the fog appeared a pigmy,
Who unhitched the royal racer,
From his back removed the harness,
Gave the weary steed attention.
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,
Carefully advanced and listened.
No one saw the strange magician,
No one heard his cautious footsteps;
Heard he songs within the dwelling,
Through the moss-stuffed chinks heard voices,
Through the walls he heard them singing,
Through the doors the peals of laughter.

Then he spied within the court-rooms,
Lurking slyly in the hall-ways,
Found the court-rooms filled with singers,
By the walls were players seated,
Near the doors the wise men hovered,
Skilful ones upon the benches,
Near the fires the wicked wizards;
All were singing songs of Lapland,
Singing songs of evil Hisi.

Now the minstrel, Lemminkainen,
Changes both his form and stature,
Passes through the inner door-ways,
Enters he the spacious court-hall,
And these words the hero utters:
“Fine the singing quickly ending,
Good the song that quickly ceases;
Better far to keep thy wisdom
Than to sing it on the house-tops.”

Comes the hostess of Pohyola,
Fleetly rushing through the door-way,
To the centre of the court-room,
And addresses thus the stranger:
“Formerly a dog lay watching,
Was a cur of iron-color,
Fond of flesh, a bone-devourer,
Loved to lick the blood of strangers.
Who then art thou of the heroes,
Who of all the host of heroes,
That thou art within my court-rooms,
That thou comest to my dwelling,
Was not seen without my portals,
Was not scented by my watch-dogs?”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Do not think that I come hither
Having neither wit nor wisdom,
Having neither art nor power,
Wanting in ancestral knowledge,
Lacking prudence of the fathers,
That thy watch-dogs may devour me.

“My devoted mother washed me,
When a frail and tender baby,
Three times in the nights of summer,
Nine times in the nights of autumn,
That upon my journeys northward
I might sing the ancient wisdom,
Thus protect myself from danger;
When at home I sing as wisely
As the minstrels of thy hamlet.”

Then the singer, Lemminkainen,
Ancient hero, Kaukomieli,
Quick began his incantations,
Straightway sang the songs of witchcraft,
From his fur-robe darts the lightning,
Flames outshooting from his eye-balls,
From the magic of his singing,
From his wonderful enchantment.
Sang the very best of singers
To the very worst of minstrels,
Filled their mouths with dust and ashes,
Piled the rocks upon their shoulders,
Stilled the best of Lapland witches,
Stilled the sorcerers and wizards.
Then he banished all their heroes,
Banished all their proudest minstrels,
This one hither, that one thither,
To the lowlands poor in verdure,
To the unproductive uplands,
To the oceans wanting whiting,
To the waterfalls of Rutya,
To the whirlpool hot and flaming,
To the waters decked with sea-foam,
Into fires and boiling waters,
Into everlasting torment.

Then the hero, Lemminkainen,
Sang the foemen with their broadswords,
Sang the heroes with their weapons,
Sang the eldest, sang the youngest,
Sang the middle-aged, enchanted;
Only one he left his senses,
He a poor, defenseless shepherd,
Old and sightless, halt and wretched,
And the old man’s name was Nasshut.
Spake the miserable shepherd:
“Thou hast old and young enchanted,
Thou hast banished all our heroes,
Why hast spared this wretched shepherd?”
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:
“Therefore have I not bewitched thee:
Thou art old, and blind, and wretched
Feeble-minded thou, and harmless,
Loathsome now without my magic.
Thou didst, in thy better life-time,
When a shepherd filled with malice,
Ruin all thy mother’s berries,
Make thy sister, too unworthy,
Ruin all thy brother’s cattle,
Drive to death thy father’s stallions,
Through the marshes, o’er the meadows,
Through the lowlands, o’er the mountains,
Heeding not thy mother’s counsel.”

Thereupon the wretched Nasshut,
Angry grew and swore for vengeance,
Straightway limping through the door-way,
Hobbled on beyond the court-yard,
O’er the meadow-lands and pastures,
To the river of the death-land,
To the holy stream and whirlpool,
To the kingdom of Tuoni,
To the islands of Manala;
Waited there for Kaukomieli,
Listened long for Lemminkainen,
Thinking he must pass this river
On his journey to his country,
On the highway to the islands,
From the upper shores of Pohya,
From the dreary Sariola.




RUNE XIII.
LEMMINIKAINEN’S SECOND WOOING.


Spake the ancient Lemminkainen
To the hostess of Pohyola:
“Give to me thy lovely daughter,
Bring me now thy winsome maiden,
Bring the best of Lapland virgins,
Fairest virgin of the Northland.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Answered thus the wild magician:
“I shall never give my daughter,
Never give my fairest maiden,
Not the best one, nor the worst one,
Not the largest, nor the smallest;
Thou hast now one wife-companion,
Thou has taken hence one hostess,
Carried off the fair Kyllikki.”

This is Lemminkainen’s answer:
“To my home I took Kyllikki,
To my cottage on the island,
To my entry-gates and kindred;
Now I wish a better hostess,
Straightway bring thy fairest daughter,
Worthiest of all thy virgins,
Fairest maid with sable tresses.”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Never will I give my daughter
To a hero false and worthless,
To a minstrel vain and evil;
Therefore, pray thou for my maiden,
Therefore, woo the sweet-faced flower,
When thou bringest me the wild-moose
From the Hisi fields and forests.”

Then the artful Lemminkainen
Deftly whittled out his javelins,
Quickly made his leathern bow-string,
And prepared his bow and arrows,
And soliloquized as follows:
“Now my javelins are made ready,
All my arrows too are ready,
And my oaken cross-bow bended,
But my snow-shoes are not builded,
Who will make me worthy snow-shoes?”

Lemminkainen, grave and thoughtful,
Long reflected, well considered,
Where the snow-shoes could be fashioned,
Who the artist that could make them;
Hastened to the Kauppi-smithy,
To the smithy of Lylikki,
Thus addressed the snow-shoe artist:
“O thou skilful Woyalander,
Kauppi, ablest smith of Lapland,
Make me quick two worthy snow-shoes,
Smooth them well and make them hardy,
That in Tapio the wild-moose,
Roaming through the Hisi-forests,
I may catch and bring to Louhi,
As a dowry for her daughter.”

Then Lylikki thus made answer,
Kauppi gave this prompt decision:
“Lemminkainen, reckless minstrel,
Thou wilt hunt in vain the wild-moose,
Thou wilt catch but pain and torture,
In the Hisi fens and forests.”

Little heeding, Lemminkainen
Spake these measures to Lylikki:
“Make for me the worthy snow-shoes,
Quickly work and make them ready;
Go I will and catch the blue-moose
Where in Tapio it browses,
In the Hisi woods and snow-fields.”

Then Lylikki, snow-shoe-maker,
Ancient Kauppi, master artist,
Whittled in the fall his show-shoes,
Smoothed them in the winter evenings,
One day working on the runners,
All the next day making stick-rings,
Till at last the shoes were finished,
And the workmanship was perfect.
Then he fastened well the shoe-straps,
Smooth as adder’s skin the woodwork,
Soft as fox-fur were the stick-rings;
Oiled he well his wondrous snow-shoes
With the tallow of the reindeer;
When he thus soliloquizes,
These the accents of Lylikki:
“Is there any youth in Lapland,
Any in this generation,
That can travel in these snow-shoes,
That can move the lower sections?”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
Full of hope, and life, and vigor:
“Surely there is one in Lapland.
In this rising generation,
That can travel in these snow-shoes,
That the right and left can manage.”

To his back he tied the quiver,
Placed the bow upon his shoulder,
With both hands he grasped his snow-cane,
Speaking meanwhile words as follow:
“There is nothing in the woodlands,
Nothing in the world of Ukko,
Nothing underneath the heavens,
In the uplands, in the lowlands,
Nothing in the snow-fields running,
Not a fleet deer of the forest,
That could not be overtaken
With the snow-shoes of Lylikki,
With the strides of Lemminkainen.”

Wicked Hisi heard these measures,
Juutas listened to their echoes;
Straightway Hisi called the wild-moose,
Juutas fashioned soon a reindeer,
And the head was made of punk-wood,
Horns of naked willow branches,
Feet were furnished by the rushes,
And the legs, by reeds aquatic,
Veins were made of withered grasses,
Eyes, from daisies of the meadows,
Ears were formed of water-flowers,
And the skin of tawny fir-bark,
Out of sappy wood, the muscles,
Fair and fleet, the magic reindeer.

Juutas thus instructs the wild-moose,
These the words of wicked Hisi:
“Flee away, thou moose of Juutas,
Flee away, thou Hisi-reindeer,
Like the winds, thou rapid courser,
To the snow-homes of the ranger,
To the ridges of the mountains,
To the snow-capped hills of Lapland,
That thy hunter may be worn out,
Thy pursuer be tormented,
Lemminkainen be exhausted.”

Thereupon the Hisi-reindeer,
Juutas-moose with branching antlers,
Fleetly ran through fen and forest,
Over Lapland’s hills and valleys,
Through the open fields and court-yards,
Through the penthouse doors and gate-ways,
Turning over tubs of water,
Threw the kettles from the fire-pole,
And upset the dishes cooking.
Then arose a fearful uproar,
In the court-yards of Pohyola,
Lapland-dogs began their barking,
Lapland-children cried in terror,
Lapland-women roared with laughter,
And the Lapland-heroes shouted.

Fleetly followed Lemminkainen,
Followed fast, and followed faster,
Hastened on behind the wild-moose,
Over swamps and through the woodlands,
Over snow-fields vast and pathless,
Over high uprising mountains,
Fire out-shooting from his runners,
Smoke arising from his snow-cane:
Could not hear the wild-moose bounding,
Could not sight the flying fleet-foot;
Glided on through field and forest,
Glided over lakes and rivers,
Over lands beyond the smooth-sea,
Through the desert plains of Hisi,
Glided o’er the plains of Kalma,
Through the kingdom of Tuoni,
To the end of Kalma’s empire,
Where the jaws of Death stand open,
Where the head of Kalma lowers,
Ready to devour the stranger,
To devour wild Lemminkainen;
But Tuoni cannot reach him,
Kalma cannot overtake him.

Distant woods are yet untraveled,
Far away a woodland corner
Stands unsearched by Kaukomieli,
In the North’s extensive borders,
In the realm of dreary Lapland.
Now the hero, on his snow-shoes,
Hastens to the distant woodlands,
There to hunt the moose of Piru.
As he nears the woodland corner,
There he hears a frightful uproar,
From the Northland’s distant borders,
From the dreary fields of Lapland,
Hears the dogs as they are barking,
Hears the children loudly screaming,
Hears the laughter of the women,
Hears the shouting of the heroes.
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Hastens forward on his snow-shoes,
To the place where dogs are barking,
To the distant woods of Lapland.

When the reckless Kaukomieli
Had approached this Hisi corner,
Straightway he began to question:
“Why this laughter of the women,
Why the screaming of the children,
Why the shouting of the heroes,
Why this barking of the watch-dogs?”
This reply was promptly given:
“This the reason for this uproar,
Women laughing, children screaming,
Heroes shouting, watch-dogs barking:
Hisi’s moose came running hither,
Hither came the Piru-Reindeer,
Hither came with hoofs of silver,
Through the open fields and court-yards,
Through the penthouse doors and gate-ways,
Turning over tubs of water,
Threw the kettles from the fire-pole,
And upset the dishes cooking.”

Then the hero, Lemminkainen,
Straightway summoned all his courage,
Pushed ahead his mighty snow-shoes,
Swift as adders in the stubble,
Levelled bushes in the marshes,
Like the swift and fiery serpents,
Spake these words of magic import,
Keeping balance with his snow-staff:
“Come thou might of Lapland heroes,
Bring to me the moose of Juutas;
Come thou strength of Lapland-women,
And prepare the boiling caldron;
Come, thou might of Lapland children,
Bring together fire and fuel;
Come, thou strength of Lapland-kettles,
Help to boil the Hisi wild-moose.”

Then with mighty force and courage,
Lemminkainen hastened onward,
Striking backward, shooting forward;
With a long sweep of his snow-shoe,
Disappeared from view the hero;
With the second, shooting further,
Was the hunter out of hearing;
With the third the hero glided
On the shoulders of the wild-moose;
Took a pole of stoutest oak-wood,
Took some bark-strings from the willow,
Wherewithal to bind the moose-deer,
Bind him to his oaken hurdle.
To the moose he spake as follows:
“Here remain, thou moose of Juutas
Skip about, my bounding courser,
In my hurdle jump and frolic,
Captive from the fields of Piru,
From the Hisi glens and mountains.”

Then he stroked the captured wild-moose,
Patted him upon his forehead,
Spake again in measured accents:
“I would like awhile to linger,
I would love to rest a moment
In the cottage of my maiden,
With my virgin, young and lovely.”

Then the Hisi-moose grew angry,
Stamped his feet and shook his antlers,
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:
“Surely Lempo soon will got thee,
Shouldst thou sit beside the maiden,
Shouldst thou linger by the virgin.”

Now the wild-moose stamps and rushes,
Tears in two the bands of willow,
Breaks the oak-wood pole in pieces,
And upturns the hunter’s hurdle,
Quickly leaping from his captor,
Bounds away with strength of freedom,
Over hills and over lowlands,
Over swamps and over snow-fields,
Over mountains clothed in heather,
That the eye may not behold him,
Nor the hero’s ear detect him.

Thereupon the mighty hunter
Angry grows, and much disheartened,
Starts again the moose to capture,
Gliding off behind the courser.
With his might he plunges forward;
At the instep breaks his snow-shoe,
Breaks the runners into fragments,
On the mountings breaks his javelins,
In the centre breaks his snow-staff,
And the moose bounds on before him,
Through the Hisi-woods and snow-fields,
Out of reach of Lemminkainen.

Then the reckless Kaukomieli
Looked with bended head, ill-humored,
One by one upon the fragments,
Speaking words of ancient wisdom:
“Northland hunters, never, never,
Go defiant to thy forests,
In the Hisi vales and mountains,
There to hunt the moose of Juutas,
Like this senseless, reckless hero;
I have wrecked my magic snow-shoes,
Ruined too my useful snow-staff,
And my javelins I have broken,
While the wild-moose runs in safety
Through the Hisi fields and forests.”




RUNE XIV.
DEATH OF LEMMINKAINEN.


Lemminkainen, much disheartened,
Deeply thought and long considered,
What to do, what course to follow,
Whether best to leave the wild-moose
In the fastnesses of Hisi,
And return to Kalevala,
Or a third time hunt the ranger,
Hoping thus to bring him captive,
Thus return at last a victor
To the forest home of Louhi,
To the joy of all her daughters,
To the wood-nymph’s happy fireside.

Taking courage Lemminkainen
Spake these words in supplication:
“Ukko, thou O God above me,
Thou Creator of the heavens,
Put my snow-shoes well in order,
And endow them both with swiftness,
That I rapidly may journey
Over marshes, over snow-fields,
Over lowlands, over highlands,
Through the realms of wicked Hisi,
Through the distant plains of Lapland,
Through the paths of Lempo’s wild-moose,
To the forest hills of Juutas.
To the snow-fields shall I journey,
Leave the heroes to the woodlands,
On the way to Tapiola,
Into Tapio’s wild dwellings.

“Greeting bring I to the mountains,
Greeting to the vales and uplands,
Greet ye, heights with forests covered,
Greet ye, ever-verdant fir-trees,
Greet ye, groves of whitened aspen,
Greetings bring to those that greet you,
Fields, and streams, and woods of Lapland.
Bring me favor, mountain-woodlands,
Lapland-deserts, show me kindness,
Mighty Tapio, be gracious,
Let me wander through thy forests,
Let me glide along thy rivers,
Let this hunter search thy snow-fields,
Where the wild-moose herds in numbers
Where the bounding reindeer lingers.

“O Nyrikki, mountain hero,
Son of Tapio of forests,
Hero with the scarlet head-gear,
Notches make along the pathway,
Landmarks upward to the mountains,
That this hunter may not wander,
May not fall, and falling perish
In the snow-fields of thy kingdom,
Hunting for the moose of Hisi,
Dowry for the pride of Northland.

“Mistress of the woods, Mielikki,
Forest-mother, formed in beauty,
Let thy gold flow out abundant,
Let thy silver onward wander,
For the hero that is seeking
For the wild-moose of thy kingdom;
Bring me here thy keys of silver,
From the golden girdle round thee;
Open Tapio’s rich chambers,
And unlock the forest fortress,
While I here await the booty,
While I hunt the moose of Lempo.

“Should this service be too menial
Give the order to thy servants,
Send at once thy servant-maidens,
And command it to thy people.
Thou wilt never seem a hostess,
If thou hast not in thy service,
Maidens ready by the hundreds,
Thousands that await thy bidding,
Who thy herds may watch and nurture,
Tend the game of thy dominions.

“Tall and slender forest-virgin,
Tapio’s beloved daughter,
Blow thou now thy honey flute-notes,
Play upon thy forest-whistle,
For the hearing of thy mistress,
For thy charming woodland-mistress,
Make her hear thy sweet-toned playing,
That she may arise from slumber.
Should thy mistress not awaken
At the calling of thy flute-notes,
Play again, and play unceasing,
Make the golden tongue re-echo.”

Wild and daring Lemminkainen
Steadfast prays upon his journey,
Calling on the gods for succor,
Hastens off through fields and moorlands,
Passes on through cruel brush-wood,
To the colliery of Hisi,
To the burning fields of Lempo;
Glided one day, then a second,
Glided all the next day onward,
Till he came to Big-stone mountain,
Climbed upon its rocky summit,
Turned his glances to the north-west,
Toward the Northland moors and marshes;
There appeared the Tapio-mansion.
All the doors were golden-colored,
Shining in the gleam of sunlight
Through the thickets on the mountains,
Through the distant fields of Northland.

Lemminkainen, much encouraged,
Hastens onward from his station
Through the lowlands, o’er the uplands,
Over snow-fields vast and vacant,
Under snow-robed firs and aspens,
Hastens forward, happy-hearted,
Quickly reaches Tapio’s court-yards,
Halts without at Tapio’s windows,
Slyly looks into her mansion,
Spies within some kindly women,
Forest-dames outstretched before him,
All are clad in scanty raiment,
Dressed in soiled and ragged linens.
Spake the stranger Lemminkainen:
“Wherefore sit ye, forest-mothers,
In your old and simple garments,
In your soiled and ragged linen?
Ye, forsooth! are too untidy,
Too unsightly your appearance
In your tattered gowns appareled.
When I lived within the forest,
There were then three mountain castles,
One of horn and one of ivory,
And the third of wood constructed;
In their walls were golden windows,
Six the windows in each castle,
Through these windows I discovered
All the host of Tapio’s mansion,
Saw its fair and stately hostess;
Saw great Tapio’s lovely daughter,
Saw Tellervo in her beauty,
With her train of charming maidens;
All were dressed in golden raiment,
Rustled all in gold and silver.
Then the forest’s queenly hostess,
Still the hostess of these woodlands,
On her arms wore golden bracelets,
Golden rings upon her fingers,
In her hair were sparkling jewels,
On her head were golden fillets,
In her ears were golden ear-rings,
On her neck a pearly necklace,
And her braidlets, silver-tinselled.

“Lovely hostess of the forest,
Metsola’s enchanting mistress,
Fling aside thine ugly straw-shoes,
Cast away the shoes of birch-bark,
Doff thy soiled and ragged linen,
Doff thy gown of shabby fabric,
Don the bright and festive raiment,
Don the gown of merry-making,
While I stay within thy borders,
While I seek my forest-booty,
Hunt the moose of evil Hisi.
Here my visit will be irksome,
Here thy guest will be ill-humored,
Waiting in thy fields and woodlands,
Hunting here the moose of Lempo,
Finding not the Hisi-ranger,
Shouldst thou give me no enjoyment,
Should I find no joy, nor respite.
Long the eve that gives no pleasure,
Long the day that brings no guerdon!

“Sable-bearded god of forests,
In thy hat and coat of ermine,
Robe thy trees in finest fibers,
Deck thy groves in richest fabrics,
Give the fir-trees shining silver,
Deck with gold the slender balsams,
Give the spruces copper belting,
And the pine-trees silver girdles,
Give the birches golden flowers,
Deck their stems with silver fret-work,
This their garb in former ages,
When the days and nights were brighter,
When the fir-trees shone like sunlight,
And the birches like the moonbeams;
Honey breathed throughout the forest,
Settled in the glens and highlands
Spices in the meadow-borders,
Oil out-pouring from the lowlands.

“Forest daughter, lovely virgin,
Golden maiden, fair Tulikki,
Second of the Tapio-daughters,
Drive the game within these borders,
To these far-extending snow-fields.
Should the reindeer be too sluggish,
Should the moose-deer move too slowly
Cut a birch-rod from the thicket,
Whip them hither in their beauty,
Drive the wild-moose to my hurdle,
Hither drive the long-sought booty
To the hunter who is watching,
Waiting in the Hisi-forests.

“When the game has started hither,
Keep them in the proper highway,
Hold thy magic hands before them,
Guard them well on either road-side,
That the elk may not escape thee,
May not dart adown some by-path.
Should, perchance, the moose-deer wander
Through some by-way of the forest,
Take him by the ears and antlers,
Hither lead the pride of Lempo.

“If the path be filled with brush-wood
Cast the brush-wood to the road-side;
If the branches cross his pathway,
Break the branches into fragments;
Should a fence of fir or alder
Cross the way that leads him hither,
Make an opening within it,
Open nine obstructing fences;
If the way be crossed by streamlets,
If the path be stopped by rivers,
Make a bridge of silken fabric,
Weaving webs of scarlet color,
Drive the deer-herd gently over,
Lead them gently o’er the waters,
O’er the rivers of thy forests,
O’er the streams of thy dominions.

“Thou, the host of Tapio’s mansion,
Gracious host of Tapiola,
Sable-bearded god of woodlands,
Golden lord of Northland forests,
Thou, O Tapio’s worthy hostess,
Queen of snowy woods, Mimerkki,
Ancient dame in sky-blue vesture,
Fenland-queen in scarlet ribbons,
Come I to exchange my silver,
To exchange my gold and silver;
Gold I have, as old as moonlight,
Silver of the age of sunshine,
In the first of years was gathered,
In the heat and pain of battle;
It will rust within my pouches,
Soon will wear away and perish,
If it be not used in trading.”

Long the hunter, Lemminkainen,
Glided through the fen and forest,
Sang his songs throughout the woodlands,
Through three mountain glens he sang them,
Sang the forest hostess friendly,
Sang he, also, Tapio friendly,
Friendly, all the forest virgins,
All of Metsola’s fair daughters.

Now they start the herds of Lempo,
Start the wild-moose from his shelter,
In the realms of evil Hisi,
Tapio’s highest mountain-region;
Now they drive the ranger homeward,
To the open courts of Piru,
To the hero that is waiting,
Hunting for the moose of Juutas.

When the herd had reached the castle,
Lemminkainen threw his lasso
O’er the antlers of the blue-moose,
Settled on the neck and shoulders
Of the mighty moose of Hisi.
Then the hunter, Kaukomieli,
Stroked his captive’s neck in safety,
For the moose was well-imprisoned.

Thereupon gay Lemminkainen
Filled with joyance spake as follows:
“Pride of forests, queen of woodlands,
Metsola’s enchanted hostess,
Lovely forest dame, Mielikki,
Mother-donor of the mountains,
Take the gold that I have promised,
Come and take away the silver;
Spread thy kerchief well before me,
Spread out here thy silken neck-wrap,
Underneath the golden treasure,
Underneath the shining silver,
That to earth it may not settle,
Scattered on the snows of winter.”

Then the hero went a victor
To the dwellings of Pohyola,
And addressed these words to Louhi:
“I have caught the moose of Hisi,
In the Metsola-dominions,
Give, O hostess, give thy daughter,
Give to me thy fairest virgin,
Bride of mine to be hereafter.”

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Gave this answer to the suitor:
“I will give to thee my daughter,
For thy wife my fairest maiden,
When for me thou’lt put a bridle
On the flaming horse of Hisi,
Rapid messenger of Lempo,
On the Hisi-plains and pastures.”

Nothing daunted, Lemminkainen
Hastened forward to accomplish
Louhi’s second test of heroes,
On the cultivated lowlands,
On the sacred fields and forests.
Everywhere he sought the racer,
Sought the fire-expiring stallion,
Fire out-shooting from his nostrils.
Lemminkainen, fearless hunter,
Bearing in his belt his bridle,
On his shoulders, reins and halter,
Sought one day, and then a second,
Finally, upon the third day,
Went he to the Hisi-mountain,
Climbed, and struggled to the summit;
To the east he turned his glances,
Cast his eyes upon the sunrise,
There beheld the flaming courser,
On the heath among the far-trees.
Lempo’s fire-expiring stallion
Fire and mingled smoke out-shooting
From his mouth, and eyes, and nostrils.

Spake the daring Lemminkainen,
This the hero’s supplication:
“Ukko, thou O God above me,
Thou that rulest all the storm-clouds,
Open thou the vault of heaven,
Open windows through the ether,
Let the icy rain come falling,
Lot the heavy hailstones shower
On the flaming horse of Hisi,
On the fire-expiring stallion.”

Ukko, the benign Creator,
Heard the prayer of Lemminkainen,
Broke apart the dome of heaven,
Rent the heights of heaven asunder,
Sent the iron-hail in showers,
Smaller than the heads of horses,
Larger than the heads of heroes,
On the flaming steed of Lempo,
On the fire-expiring stallion,
On the terror of the Northland.

Lemminkainen, drawing nearer,
Looked with care upon the courser,
Then he spake the words that follow:
“Wonder-steed of mighty Hisi,
Flaming horse of Lempo’s mountain,
Bring thy mouth of gold, assenting,
Gently place thy head of silver
In this bright and golden halter,
In this silver-mounted bridle.
I shall never harshly treat thee,
Never make thee fly too fleetly,
On the way to Sariola,
On the tracks of long duration,
To the hostess of Pohyola,
To her magic courts and stables,
Will not lash thee on thy journey;
I shall lead thee gently forward,
Drive thee with the reins of kindness,
Cover thee with silken blankets.”

Then the fire-haired steed of Juutas,
Flaming horse of mighty Hisi,
Put his head of shining silver,
In the bright and golden head-stall,
In the silver-mounted bridle.
Thus the hero, Lemminkainen,
Easy bridles Lempo’s stallion,
Flaming horse of evil Piru;
Lays the bits within his fire-mouth,
On his silver head, the halter,
Mounts the fire-expiring courser,
Brandishes his whip of willow,
Hastens forward on his journey,
Bounding o’er the hills and mountains,
Dashing through the valleys northward,
O’er the snow-capped hills of Lapland,
To the courts of Sariola.

Then the hero, quick dismounting,
Stepped within the court of Louhi,
Thus addressed the Northland hostess:
“I have bridled Lempo’s fire-horse,
I have caught the Hisi-racer,
Caught the fire-expiring stallion,
In the Piru plains and pastures,
Ridden him within thy borders;
I have caught the moose of Lempo,
I have done what thou demandest;
Give, I pray thee, now thy daughter,
Give to me thy fairest maiden,
Bride of mine to be forever.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Made this answer to the suitor:
“I will only give my daughter,
Give to thee my fairest virgin,
Bride of thine to be forever,
When for me the swan thou killest
In the river of Tuoni,
Swimming in the black death-river,
In the sacred stream and whirlpool;
Thou canst try one cross-bow only,
But one arrow from thy quiver.”

Then the reckless Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Braved the third test of the hero,
Started out to hunt the wild-swan,
Hunt the long-necked, graceful swimmer,
In Tuoni’s coal-black river,
In Manala’s lower regions.
Quick the daring hunter journeyed,
Hastened off with fearless footsteps,
To the river of Tuoni,
To the sacred stream and whirlpool,
With his bow upon his shoulder,
With his quiver and one arrow.

Nasshut, blind and crippled shepherd,
Wretched shepherd of Pohyola,
Stood beside the death-land river,
Near the sacred stream and whirlpool,
Guarding Tuonela’s waters,
Waiting there for Lemminkainen,
Listening there for Kaukomieli,
Waiting long the hero’s coming.
Finally he hears the footsteps
Of the hero on his journey,
Hears the tread of Lemminkainen,
As he journeys nearer, nearer,
To the river of Tuoni,
To the cataract of death-land,
To the sacred stream and whirlpool.
Quick the wretched shepherd, Nasshut,
From the death-stream sends a serpent,
Like an arrow from a cross-bow,
To the heart of Lemminkainen,
Through the vitals of the hero.

Lemminkainen, little conscious,
Hardly knew that he was injured,
Spake these measures as he perished:
“Ah! unworthy is my conduct,
Ah! unwisely have I acted,
That I did not heed my mother,
Did not take her goodly counsel,
Did not learn her words of magic.
Oh! for three words with my mother,
How to live, and how to suffer,
In this time of dire misfortune,
How to bear the stings of serpents,
Tortures of the reed of waters,
From the stream of Tuonela!

“Ancient mother who hast borne me,
Who hast trained me from my childhood,
Learn, I pray thee, where I linger,
Where alas! thy son is lying,
Where thy reckless hero suffers.
Come, I pray thee, faithful mother,
Come thou quickly, thou art needed,
Come deliver me from torture,
From the death-jaws of Tuoni,
From the sacred stream and whirlpool.”

Northland’s old and wretched shepherd,
Nasshut, the despised protector
Of the flocks of Sariola,
Throws the dying Lemminkainen,
Throws the hero of the islands,
Into Tuonela’s river,
To the blackest stream of death-land,
To the worst of fatal whirlpools.
Lemminkainen, wild and daring,
Helpless falls upon the waters,
Floating down the coal-black current,
Through the cataract and rapids
To the tombs of Tuonela.

There the blood-stained son of death-land,
There Tuoni’s son and hero,
Cuts in pieces Lemminkainen,
Chops him with his mighty hatchet,
Till the sharpened axe strikes flint-sparks
From the rocks within his chamber,
Chops the hero into fragments,
Into five unequal portions,
Throws each portion to Tuoni,
In Manala’s lowest kingdom,
Speaks these words when he has ended:
“Swim thou there, wild Lemminkainen,
Flow thou onward in this river,
Hunt forever in these waters,
With thy cross-bow and thine arrow,
Shoot the swan within this empire,
Shoot our water-birds in welcome!”

Thus the hero, Lemminkainen,
Thus the handsome Kaukomieli,
The untiring suitor, dieth
In the river of Tuoni,
In the death-realm of Manala.




RUNE XV.
LEMMINKAINEN’S RESTORATION.


Lemminkainen’s aged mother
Anxious roams about the islands,
Anxious wonders in her chambers,
What the fate of Lemminkainen,
Why her son so long has tarried;
Thinks that something ill has happened
To her hero in Pohyola.
Sad, indeed, the mother’s anguish,
As in vain she waits his coming,
As in vain she asks the question,
Where her daring son is roaming,
Whether to the fir-tree mountain,
Whether to the distant heath-land,
Or upon the broad-sea’s ridges,
On the floods and rolling waters,
To the war’s contending armies,
To the heat and din of battle,
Steeped in blood of valiant heroes,
Evidence of fatal warfare.

Daily does the wife Kyllikki
Look about her vacant chamber,
In the home of Lemminkainen,
At the court of Kaukomieli;
Looks at evening, looks at morning,
Looks, perchance, upon his hair-brush,
Sees alas! the blood-drops oozing,
Oozing from the golden bristles,
And the blood-drops, scarlet-colored.

Then the beauteous wife, Kyllikki,
Spake these words in deeps of anguish:
“Dead or wounded is my husband,
Or at best is filled with trouble,
Lost perhaps in Northland forests,
In some glen unknown to heroes,
Since alas! the blood is flowing
From the brush of Lemminkainen,
Red drops oozing from the bristles.”

Thereupon the anxious mother
Looks upon the bleeding hair-brush
And begins this wail of anguish:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated,
Woe is me, all joy departed!
For alas! my son and hero,
Valiant hero of the islands,
Son of trouble and misfortune!
Some sad fate has overtaken
My ill-fated Lemminkainen!
Blood is flowing from his hair-brush,
Oozing from its golden bristles,
And the drops are scarlet-colored.”

Quick her garment’s hem she clutches,
On her arm she throws her long-robes,
Fleetly flies upon her journey;
With her might she hastens northward,
Mountains tremble from her footsteps,
Valleys rise and heights are lowered,
Highlands soon become as lowlands,
All the hills and valleys levelled.
Soon she gains the Northland village,
Quickly asks about her hero,
These the words the mother utters:
“O thou hostess of Pohyola,
Where hast thou my Lemminkainen?
Tell me of my son and hero!”

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Gives this answer to the mother:
“Nothing know I of thy hero,
Of the hero of the islands;
Where thy son may be I know not,
Cannot lend the information;
Once I gave thy son a courser,
Hitched the racer to his snow-sledge,
This the last of Lemminkainen;
May perchance be drowned in Wuhne,
Frozen in the icy ocean,
Fallen prey to wolves in hunger,
In a bear’s den may have perished.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answers:
“Thou art only speaking falsehoods,
Northland wolves cannot devour us,
Nor the bears kill Kaukomieli;
He can slay the wolves of Pohya
With the fingers of his left hand;
Bears of Northland he would silence
With the magic of his singing.

“Hostess of Pohyola, tell me
Whither thou hast sent my hero;
I shall burst thy many garners,
Shall destroy the magic Sampo,
If thou dost not tell me truly
Where to find my Lemminkainen.”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“I have well thy hero treated,
Well my court has entertained him,
Gave him of my rarest viands,
Fed him at my well-filled tables,
Placed him in a boat of copper,
Thus to float adown the current,
This the last of Lemminkainen;
Cannot tell where he has wandered,
Whether in the foam of waters,
Whether in the boiling torrent,
Whether in the drowning whirlpool.”

Lemminkainen’s mother answers:
“Thou again art speaking falsely;
Tell me now the truth I pray thee,
Make an end of thy deception,
Where is now my Lemminkainen,
Whither hast thou sent my hero,
Young and daring son of Kalew?
If a third time thou deceivest,
I will send thee plagues, unnumbered,
I will send thee fell destruction,
Certain death will overtake thee.”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“This the third time that I answer,
This the truth that I shall tell thee:
I have sent the Kalew-hero
To the Hisi-fields and forests,
There to hunt the moose of Lempo;
Sent him then to catch the fire-horse,
Catch the fire-expiring stallion,
On the distant plains of Juutas,
In the realm of cruel Hisi.
Then I sent him to the Death-stream,
In the kingdom of Tuoni,
With his bow and but one arrow,
There to shoot the swan as dowry
For my best and fairest daughter;
Have not heard about thy hero
Since he left for Tuonela;
May in misery have fallen,
May have perished in Manala;
Has not come to ask my daughter,
Has not come to woo the maiden,
Since he left to hunt the death-swan.”

Now the mother seeks her lost one,
For her son she weeps and trembles,
Like the wolf she bounds through fenlands,
Like the bear, through forest thickets,
Like the wild-boar, through the marshes,
Like the hare, along the sea-coast,
To the sea-point, like the hedgehog,
Like the wild-duck swims the waters,
Casts the rubbish from her pathway,
Tramples down opposing brush-wood,
Stops at nothing in her journey;
Seeks a long time for her hero,
Seeks, and seeks, and does not find him.

Now she asks the trees the question,
And the forest gives this answer:
“We have care enough already,
Cannot think about thy matters;
Cruel fates have we to battle,
Pitiful our own misfortunes!
We are felled and chopped in pieces,
Cut in blocks for hero-fancy,
We are burned to death as fuel,
No one cares how much we suffer.”

Now again the mother wanders,
Seeks again her long-lost hero,
Seeks, and seeks, and does not find him.
Paths arise and come to meet her,
And she questions thus the pathways:
“Paths of hope that God has fashioned,
Have ye seen my Lemminkainen,
Has my son and golden hero
Travelled through thy many kingdoms?”
Sad, the many pathways answer:
“We ourselves have cares sufficient,
Cannot watch thy son and hero,
Wretched are the lives of pathways,
Deep indeed our own misfortunes;
We are trodden by the red-deer,
By the wolves, and bears, and roebucks,
Driven o’er by heavy cart-wheels,
By the feet of dogs are trodden,
Trodden under foot of heroes,
Foot-paths for contending armies.”

Seeks again the frantic mother,
Seeks her long-lost son and hero,
Seeks, and seeks, and does not find him;
Finds the Moon within her orbit,
Asks the Moon in pleading measures:
“Golden Moon, whom God has stationed
In the heavens, the Sun’s companion,
Hast thou seen my Kaukomieli,
Hast thou seen my silver apple,
Anywhere in thy dominions?”
Thus the golden Moon makes answer:
“I have trouble all-sufficient,
Cannot watch thy daring hero;
Long the journey I must travel,
Sad the fate to me befallen,
Pitiful mine own misfortunes,
All alone the nights to wander,
Shine alone without a respite,
In the winter ever watching,
In the summer sink and perish.”

Still the mother seeks, and wanders,
Seeks, and does not find her hero;
Sees the Sun in the horizon,
And the mother thus entreats him:
“Silver Sun, whom God has fashioned,
Thou that giveth warmth and comfort,
Hast thou lately seen my hero,
Hast thou seen my Lemminkainen,
Wandering in thy dominions?”
Thus the Sun in kindness answers:
“Surely has thy hero perished,
To ingratitude a victim;
Lemminkainen died and vanished
In Tuoni’s fatal river,
In the waters of Manala,
In the sacred stream and whirlpool,
In the cataract and rapids,
Sank within the drowning current
To the realm of Tuonela,
To Manala’s lower regions.”

Lemminkainen’s mother weeping,
Wailing in the deeps of anguish,
Mourns the fate of Kaukomieli,
Hastens to the Northland smithy,
To the forge of Ilmarinen,
These the words the mother utters:
“Ilmarinen, metal-artist,
Thou that long ago wert forging,
Forging earth a concave cover,
Yesterday wert forging wonders,
Forge thou now, immortal blacksmith,
Forge a rake with shaft of copper,
Forge the teeth of strongest metal,
Teeth in length a hundred fathoms,
And five hundred long the handle.”

Ilmarinen does as bidden,
Makes the rake in full perfection.

Lemminkainen’s anxious mother
Takes the magic rake and hastens
To the river of Tuoni,
Praying to the Sun as follows:
“Thou, O Sun, by God created,
Thou that shinest on thy Maker,
Shine for me in heat of magic,
Give me warmth, and strength, and courage,
Shine a third time full of power,
Lull to sleep the wicked people,
Still the people of Manala,
Quiet all Tuoni’s empire.”

Thereupon the sun of Ukko,
Dearest child of the Creator,
Flying through the groves of Northland,
Sitting on a curving birch-tree,
Shines a little while in ardor,
Shines again in greater fervor,
Shines a third time full of power,
Lulls to sleep the wicked people
In the Manala home and kingdom,
Still the heroes with their broadswords,
Makes the lancers halt and totter,
Stills the stoutest of the spearmen,
Quiets Tuoni’s ghastly empire.
Now the Sun retires in magic,
Hovers here and there a moment
Over Tuoni’s hapless sleepers,
Hastens upward to his station,
To his Jumala home and kingdom.

Lemminkainen’s faithful mother
Takes the rake of magic metals,
Rakes the Tuoni river bottoms,
Rakes the cataract and whirlpool,
Rakes the swift and boiling current
Of the sacred stream of death-land,
In the Manala home and kingdom.
Searching for her long-lost hero,
Rakes a long time, finding nothing;
Now she wades the river deeper,
To her belt in mud and water,
Deeper, deeper, rakes the death-stream,
Rakes the river’s deepest caverns,
Raking up and down the current,
Till at last she finds his tunic,
Heavy-hearted, finds his jacket;
Rakes again and rakes unceasing,
Finds the hero’s shoes and stockings,
Sorely troubled, finds these relics;
Now she wades the river deeper,
Rakes the Manala shoals and shallows,
Rakes the deeps at every angle;
As she draws the rake the third time
From the Tuoni shores and waters,
In the rake she finds the body
Of her long-lost Lemminkainen,
In the metal teeth entangled,
In the rake with copper handle.

Thus the reckless Lemminkainen,
Thus the son of Kalevala,
Was recovered from the bottom
Of the Manala lake and river.
There were wanting many fragments,
Half the head, a hand, a fore-arm,
Many other smaller portions,
Life, above all else, was missing.
Then the mother, well reflecting,
Spake these words in bitter weeping:
“From these fragments, with my magic,
I will bring to life my hero.”

Hearing this, the raven answered,
Spake these measures to the mother:
“There is not in these a hero,
Thou canst not revive these fragments;
Eels have fed upon his body,
On his eyes have fed the whiting;
Cast the dead upon the waters,
On the streams of Tuonela,
Let him there become a walrus,
Or a seal, or whale, or porpoise.”

Lemminkainen’s mother does not
Cast the dead upon the waters,
On the streams of Tuonela;
She again with hope and courage,
Rakes the river lengthwise, crosswise,
Through the Manala pools and caverns,
Rakes up half the head, a fore-arm,
Finds a hand and half the back-bone,
Many other smaller portions;
Shapes her son from all the fragments,
Shapes anew her Lemminkainen,
Flesh to flesh with skill she places,
Gives the bones their proper stations,
Binds one member to the other,
Joins the ends of severed vessels,
Counts the threads of all the venules,
Knits the parts in apposition;
Then this prayer the mother offers:

“Suonetar, thou slender virgin,
Goddess of the veins of heroes,
Skilful spinner of the vessels,
With thy slender, silver spindle,
With thy spinning-wheel of copper,
Set in frame of molten silver,
Come thou hither, thou art needed;
Bring the instruments for mending,
Firmly knit the veins together,
At the end join well the venules,
In the wounds that still are open,
In the members that are injured.

“Should this aid be inefficient,
There is living in the ether,
In a boat enriched with silver,
In a copper boat, a maiden,
That can bring to thee assistance.
Come, O maiden, from the ether,
Virgin from the belt of heaven,
Row throughout these veins, O maiden,
Row through all these lifeless members,
Through the channels of the long-bones,
Row through every form of tissue.
Set the vessels in their places,
Lay the heart in right position,
Make the pulses beat together,
Join the smallest of the veinlets,
And unite with skill the sinews.
Take thou now a slender needle,
Silken thread within its eyelet,
Ply the silver needle gently,
Sew with care the wounds together.

“Should this aid be inefficient,
Thou, O God, that knowest all things,
Come and give us thine assistance,
Harness thou thy fleetest racer,
Call to aid thy strongest courser,
In thy scarlet sledge come swiftly,
Drive through all the bones and channels,
Drive throughout these lifeless tissues,
Drive thy courser through each vessel,
Bind the flesh and bones securely,
In the joints put finest silver,
Purest gold in all the fissures.

“Where the skin is broken open,
Where the veins are torn asunder,
Mend these injuries with magic;
Where the blood has left the body,
There make new blood flow abundant;
Where the bones are rudely broken,
Set the parts in full perfection;
Where the flesh is bruised and loosened,
Touch the wounds with magic balsam,
Do not leave a part imperfect;
Bone, and vein, and nerve, and sinew,
Heart, and brain, and gland, and vessel,
Heal as Thou alone canst heal them.”

These the means the mother uses,
Thus she joins the lifeless members,
Thus she heals the death-like tissues,
Thus restores her son and hero
To his former life and likeness;
All his veins are knit together,
All their ends are firmly fastened,
All the parts in apposition,
Life returns, but speech is wanting,
Deaf and dumb, and blind, and senseless.
Now the mother speaks as follows:
“Where may I procure the balsam,
Where the drops of magic honey,
To anoint my son and hero,
Thus to heal my Lemminkainen,
That again his month may open,
May again begin his singing,
Speak again in words of wonder,
Sing again his incantations?

“Tiny bee, thou honey-birdling,
Lord of all the forest flowers,
Fly away and gather honey,
Bring to me the forest-sweetness,
Found in Metsola’s rich gardens,
And in Tapio’s fragrant meadows,
From the petals of the flowers,
From the blooming herbs and grasses,
Thus to heal my hero’s anguish,
Thus to heal his wounds of evil.”

Thereupon the honey-birdling
Flies away on wings of swiftness,
Into Metsola’s rich gardens,
Into Tapio’s flowery meadows,
Gathers sweetness from the meadows,
With the tongue distills the honey
From the cups of seven flowers,
From the bloom of countless grasses;
Quick from Metsola returning,
Flying, humming, darting onward,
With his winglets honey-laden,
With the store of sweetest odors,
To the mother brings the balsam.
Lemminkainen’s anxious mother
Takes the balm of magic virtues,
And anoints the injured hero,
Heals his wounds and stills his anguish;
But the balm is inefficient,
For her son is deaf and speechless.

Then again out-speaks the mother:
“Little bee, my honey-birdling,
Fly away in one direction,
Fly across the seven oceans,
In the eighth, a magic island,
Where the honey is enchanted,
To the distant Turi-castles,
To the chambers of Palwoinen;
There the honey is effective,
There, the wonder-working balsam,
This may heal the wounded hero;
Bring me of this magic ointment,
That I may anoint his eyelids,
May restore his injured senses.”

Thereupon the honey-birdling
Flies away o’er seven oceans,
To the old enchanted island;
Flies one day, and then a second,
On the verdure does not settle,
Does not rest upon the flowers;
Flies a third day, fleetly onward,
Till a third day evening brings him
To the island in the ocean,
To the meadows rich in honey,
To the cataract and fire-flow,
To the sacred stream and whirlpool.

There the honey was preparing,
There the magic balm distilling
In the tiny earthen vessels,
In the burnished copper kettles,
Smaller than a maiden’s thimble,
Smaller than the tips of fingers.
Faithfully the busy insect
Gathers the enchanted honey
From the magic Turi-cuplets
In the chambers of Palwoinen.

Time had gone but little distance,
Ere the bee came loudly humming,
Flying fleetly, honey-laden;
In his arms were seven vessels,
Seven, the vessels on each shoulder;
All were filled with honey-balsam,
With the balm of magic virtues.

Lemminkainen’s tireless mother
Quick anoints her speechless hero,
With the magic Turi-balsam,
With the balm of seven virtues;
Nine the times that she anoints him
With the honey of Palwoinen,
With the wonder-working balsam;
But the balm is inefficient,
For the hero still is speechless.
Then again out-speaks the mother:
“Honey-bee, thou ether birdling,
Fly a third time on thy journey,
Fly away to high Jumala,
Fly thou to the seventh heaven,
Honey there thou’lt find abundant,
Balsam of the highest virtue,
Only used by the Creator,
Only made from the breath of Ukko.
God anoints his faithful children,
With the honey of his wisdom,
When they feel the pangs of sorrow,
When they meet the powers of evil.
Dip thy winglets in this honey,
Steep thy plumage in His sweetness,
Hither bring the all-sufficient
Balsam of the great Creator;
This will still my hero’s anguish,
This will heal his wounded tissues,
This restore his long-lost vision,
Make the Northland hills re-echo
With the magic of his singing,
With his wonderful enchantment.”
Thus the honey-bee made answer:
“I can never fly to heaven,
To the seventh of the heavens,
To the distant home of Ukko,
With these wings of little virtue.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Thou canst surely fly to heaven,
To the seventh of the heavens,
O’er the Moon, beneath the sunshine,
Through the dim and distant starlight.
On the first day, flying upward,
Thou wilt near the Moon in heaven,
Fan the brow of Kootamoinen;
On the second thou canst rest thee
On the shoulders of Otava;
On the third day, flying higher,
Rest upon the seven starlets,
On the heads of Hetewanè;
Short the journey that is left thee,
Inconsiderable the distance
To the home of mighty Ukko,
To the dwellings of the blessed.”

Thereupon the bee arising,
From the earth flies swiftly upward,
Hastens on with graceful motion,
By his tiny wings borne heavenward,
In the paths of golden moonbeams,
Touches on the Moon’s bright borders,
Fans the brow of Kootamoinen,
Rests upon Otava’s shoulders,
Hastens to the seven starlets,
To the heads of Hetewanè,
Flies to the Creator’s castle,
To the home of generous Ukko,
Finds the remedy preparing,
Finds the balm of life distilling,
In the silver-tinted caldrons,
In the purest golden kettles;
On one side, heart-easing honey,
On a second, balm of joyance,
On the third, life-giving balsam.
Here the magic bee, selecting,
Culls the sweet, life-giving balsam,
Gathers too, heart-easing honey,
Heavy-laden hastens homeward.

Time had traveled little distance,
Ere the busy bee came humming
To the anxious mother waiting,
In his arms a hundred cuplets,
And a thousand other vessels,
Filled with honey, filled with balsam,
Filled with the balm of the Creator.

Lemminkainen’s mother quickly
Takes them on her tongue and tests them,
Finds a balsam all-sufficient.
Then the mother spake as follows:
“I have found the long-sought balsam,
Found the remedy of Ukko,
Wherewith God anoints his people,
Gives them life, and faith, and wisdom,
Heals their wounds and stills their anguish,
Makes them strong against temptation,
Guards them from the evil-doers.”

Now the mother well anointing,
Heals her son, the magic singer,
Eyes, and ears, and tongue, and temples,
Breaks, and cuts, and seams, anointing,
Touching well the life-blood centres,
Speaks these words of magic import
To the sleeping Lemminkainen:
“Wake, arise from out thy slumber,
From the worst of low conditions,
From thy state of dire misfortune!”

Quickly wakes the son and hero,
Rises from the depths of slumber,
Speaks again in magic accents,
These the first words of the singer:
“Long, indeed, have I been sleeping,
Long unconscious of existence,
But my sleep was full of sweetness,
Sweet the sleep in Tuonela,
Knowing neither joy nor sorrow!”
This the answer of his mother:
“Longer still thou wouldst have slumbered,
Were it not for me, thy mother;
Tell me now, my son beloved,
Tell me that I well may hear thee,
Who enticed thee to Manala,
To the river of Tuoni,
To the fatal stream and whirlpool?”

Then the hero, Lemminkainen,
Gave this answer to his mother:
“Nasshut, the decrepit shepherd
Of the flocks of Sariola,
Blind, and halt, and poor, and wretched,
And to whom I did a favor;
From the slumber-land of envy
Nasshut sent me to Manala,
To the river of Tuoni;
Sent a serpent from the waters,
Sent an adder from the death-stream,
Through the heart of Lemminkainen;
Did not recognize the serpent,
Could not speak the serpent-language,
Did not know the sting of adders.”
Spake again the ancient mother:
“O thou son of little insight,
Senseless hero, fool-magician,
Thou didst boast betimes thy magic
To enchant the wise enchanters,
On the dismal shores of Lapland,
Thou didst think to banish heroes,
From the borders of Pohyola;
Didst not know the sting of serpents,
Didst not know the reed of waters,
Nor the magic word-protector!
Learn the origin of serpents,
Whence the poison of the adder.

“In the floods was born the serpent,
From the marrow of the gray-duck,
From the brain of ocean-swallows;
Suoyatar had made saliva,
Cast it on the waves of ocean,
Currents drove it outward, onward,
Softly shone the sun upon it,
By the winds ’twas gently cradled,
Gently nursed by winds and waters,
By the waves was driven shoreward,
Landed by the surging billows.
Thus the serpent, thing of evil,
Filling all the world with trouble,
Was created in the waters
Born from Suoyatar, its maker.”

Then the mother of the hero
Rocked her son to rest and comfort,
Rocked him to his former being,
To his former life and spirit,
Into greater magic powers;
Wiser, handsomer than ever
Grew the hero of the islands;
But his heart was full of trouble,
And his mother, ever watchful,
Asked the cause of his dejection.
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:
“This the cause of all my sorrow;
Far away my heart is roaming,
All my thoughts forever wander
To the Northland’s blooming virgins,
To the maids of braided tresses.
Northland’s ugly hostess, Louhi,
Will not give to me her daughter,
Fairest maiden of Pohyola,
Till I kill the swan of Mana,
With my bow and but one arrow,
In the river of Tuoni.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answers,
In the sacred stream and whirlpool.
“Let the swan swim on in safety,
Give the water-bird his freedom,
In the river of Manala,
In the whirlpool of Tuoni;
Leave the maiden in the Northland,
With her charms and fading beauty;
With thy fond and faithful mother,
Go at once to Kalevala,
To thy native fields and fallows.
Praise thy fortune, all sufficient,
Praise, above all else, thy Maker.
Ukko gave thee aid when needed,
Thou wert saved by thy Creator,
From thy long and hopeless slumber,
In the waters of Tuoni,
In the chambers of Manala.
I unaided could not save thee,
Could not give the least assistance;
God alone, omniscient Ukko,
First and last of the creators,
Can revive the dead and dying,
Can protect his worthy people
From the waters of Manala,
From the fatal stream and whirlpool,
In the kingdom of Tuoni.”

Lemminkainen, filled with wisdom,
With his fond and faithful mother,
Hastened straightway on his journey
To his distant home and kindred,
To the Wainola fields and meadows,
To the plains of Kalevala.


Here I leave my Kaukomieli,
Leave my hero Lemminkainen,
Long I leave him from my singing,
Turn my song to other heroes,
Send it forth on other pathways,
Sing some other golden legend.




RUNE XVI.
WAINAMOINEN’S BOAT-BUILDING.


Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
For his boat was working lumber,
Working long upon his vessel,
On a fog-point jutting seaward,
On an island, forest-covered;
But the lumber failed the master,
Beams were wanting for his vessel,
Beams and scantling, ribs and flooring.
Who will find for him the lumber,
Who procure the timber needed
For the boat of Wainamoinen,
For the bottom of his vessel?

Pellerwoinen of the prairies,
Sampsa, slender-grown and ancient,
He will seek the needful timber,
He procure the beams of oak-wood
For the boat of Wainamoinen,
For the bottom of his vessel.

Quick he starts upon his journey
To the eastern fields and forests,
Hunts throughout the Northland mountain
To a second mountain wanders,
To a third he hastens, searching,
Golden axe upon his shoulder,
In his hand a copper hatchet.
Comes an aspen-tree to meet him
Of the height of seven fathoms.
Sampsa takes his axe of copper,
Starts to fell the stately aspen,
But the aspen quickly halting,
Speaks these words to Pellerwoinen:
“Tell me, hero, what thou wishest,
What the service thou art needing?”
Sampsa Pellerwoinen answers:
“This indeed, the needed service
That I ask of thee, O aspen:
Need thy lumber for a vessel,
For the boat of Wainamoinen,
Wisest of the wisdom-singers.”

Quick and wisely speaks the aspen,
Thus its hundred branches answer:
“All the boats that have been fashioned
From my wood have proved but failures;
Such a vessel floats a distance,
Then it sinks upon the bottom
Of the waters it should travel.
All my trunk is filled with hollows,
Three times in the summer seasons
Worms devour my stem and branches,
Feed upon my heart and tissues.”

Pellerwoinen leaves the aspen,
Hunts again through all the forest,
Wanders through the woods of Northland,
Where a pine-tree comes to meet him,
Of the height of fourteen fathoms.

With his axe he chops the pine-tree,
Strikes it with his axe of copper,
As he asks the pine this question:
“Will thy trunk give worthy timber
For the boat of Wainamoinen,
Wisest of the wisdom-singers?”
Loudly does the pine-tree answer:
“All the ships that have been fashioned
From my body are unworthy;
I am full of imperfections,
Cannot give thee needed timber
Wherewithal to build thy vessel;
Ravens live within my branches,
Build their nests and hatch their younglings,
Three times in my trunk in summer.”

Sampsa leaves the lofty pine-tree,
Wanders onward, onward, onward,
To the woods of gladsome summer,
Where an oak-tree comes to meet him,
In circumference, three fathoms,
And the oak he thus addresses:
“Ancient oak-tree, will thy body
Furnish wood to build a vessel,
Build a boat for Wainamoinen,
Master-boat for the magician,
Wisest of the wisdom-singers?”
Thus the oak replies to Sampsa:
“I for thee will gladly furnish
Wood to build the hero’s vessel;
I am tall, and sound, and hardy,
Have no flaws within my body;
Three times in the months of summer,
In the warmest of the seasons,
Does the sun dwell in my tree-top,
On my trunk the moonlight glimmers,
In my branches sings the cuckoo,
In my top her nestlings slumber.”

Now the ancient Pellerwoinen
Takes the hatchet from his shoulder,
Takes his axe with copper handle,
Chops the body of the oak-tree;
Well he knows the art of chopping.
Soon he fells the tree majestic,
Fells the mighty forest-monarch,
With his magic axe and power.
From the stems he lops the branches,
Splits the trunk in many pieces,
Fashions lumber for the bottom,
Countless boards, and ribs, and braces,
For the singer’s magic vessel,
For the boat of the magician.

Wainamoinen, old and skilful,
The eternal wonder-worker,
Builds his vessel with enchantment,
Builds his boat by art of magic,
From the timber of the oak-tree,
From its posts, and planks, and flooring.
Sings a song, and joins the frame-work;
Sings a second, sets the siding;
Sings a third time, sets the row-locks;
Fashions oars, and ribs, and rudder,
Joins the sides and ribs together.
When the ribs were firmly fastened,
When the sides were tightly jointed,
Then alas! three words were wanting,
Lost the words of master-magic,
How to fasten in the ledges,
How the stern should be completed,
How complete the boat’s forecastle.

Then the ancient Wainamoinen,
Wise and wonderful enchanter,
Heavy-hearted spake as follows:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!
Never will this magic vessel
Pass in safety o’er the water,
Never ride the rough sea-billows.”

Then he thought and long considered,
Where to find these words of magic,
Find the lost-words of the Master:
“From the brains of countless swallows,
From the heads of swans in dying,
From the plumage of the gray-duck?”

For these words the hero searches,
Kills of swans a goodly number,
Kills a flock of fattened gray-duck,
Kills of swallows countless numbers,
Cannot find the words of magic,
Not the lost-words of the Master.
Wainamoinen, wisdom-singer,
Still reflected and debated:
“I perchance may find the lost-words
On the tongue of summer-reindeer,
In the mouth of the white squirrel.”

Now again he hunts the lost-words,
Hastes to find the magic sayings,
Kills a countless host of reindeer,
Kills a rafterful of squirrels,
Finds of words a goodly number,
But they are of little value,
Cannot find the magic lost-word.
Long he thought and well considered:
“I can find of words a hundred
In the dwellings of Tuoni,
In the Manala fields and castles.”

Wainamoinen quickly journeys
To the kingdom of Tuoni,
There to find the ancient wisdom,
There to learn the secret doctrine;
Hastens on through fen and forest,
Over meads and over marshes,
Through the ever-rising woodlands,
Journeys one week through the brambles,
And a second through the hazels,
Through the junipers the third week,
When appear Tuoni’s islands,
And the Manala fields and castles.

Wainamoinen, brave and ancient,
Calls aloud in tones of thunder,
To the Tuonela deeps and dungeons,
And to Manala’s magic castle:
“Bring a boat, Tuoni’s daughter,
Bring a ferry-boat, O maiden,
That may bear me o’er this channel,
O’er this black and fatal river.”

Quick the daughter of Tuoni,
Magic maid of little stature,
Tiny virgin of Manala,
Tiny washer of the linen,
Tiny cleaner of the dresses,
At the river of Tuoni,
In Manala’s ancient castles,
Speaks these words to Wainamoinen,
Gives this answer to his calling:
“Straightway will I bring the row-boat,
When the reasons thou hast given
Why thou comest to Manala
In a hale and active body.”

Wainamoinen, old and artful,
Gives this answer to the maiden:
“I was brought here by Tuoni,
Mana raised me from the coffin.”
Speaks the maiden of Manala:
“This a tale of wretched liars;
Had Tuoni brought thee hither,
Mana raised thee from the coffin,
Then Tuoni would be with thee,
Manalainen too would lead thee,
With Tuoni’s hat upon thee,
On thy hands, the gloves of Mana;
Tell the truth now, Wainamoinen,
What has brought thee to Manala?”

Wainamoinen, artful hero,
Gives this answer, still finessing:
“Iron brought me to Manala,
To the kingdom of Tuoni.”

Speaks the virgin of the death-land,
Mana’s wise and tiny daughter:
“Well I know that this is falsehood,
Had the iron brought thee hither,
Brought thee to Tuoni’s kingdom,
Blood would trickle from thy vesture,
And the blood-drops, scarlet-colored.
Speak the truth now, Wainamoinen,
This the third time that I ask thee.”

Wainamoinen, little heeding,
Still finesses to the daughter:
“Water brought me to Manala,
To the kingdom of Tuoni.”
This the tiny maiden’s answer:
“Well I know thou speakest falsely;
If the waters of Manala,
If the cataract and whirlpool,
Or the waves had brought thee hither,
From thy robes the drops would trickle,
Water drip from all thy raiment.
Tell the truth and I will serve thee,
What has brought thee to Manala?”

Then the stubborn Wainamoinen
Told this falsehood to the maiden:
“Fire has brought me to Manala,
To the kingdom of Tuoni.”
Spake again Tuoni’s daughter:
“Well I know the voice of falsehood.
If the fire had brought thee hither,
Brought thee to Tuoni’s empire,
Singed would be thy locks and eyebrows,
And thy beard be crisped and tangled.
O, thou foolish Wainamoinen,
If I row thee o’er the ferry,
Thou must speak the truth in answer,
This the last time I will ask thee;
Make an end of thy deception.
What has brought thee to Manala,
Still unharmed by pain or sickness,
Still untouched by Death’s dark angels?”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“At the first I spake, not truly,
Now I give thee rightful answer:
I a boat with ancient wisdom,
Fashioned with my powers of magic,
Sang one day and then a second,
Sang the third day until evening,
When I broke the magic main-spring,
Broke my magic sledge in pieces,
Of my song the fleetest runners;
Then I come to Mana’s kingdom,
Came to borrow here a hatchet,
Thus to mend my sledge of magic,
Thus to join the parts together.
Send the boat now quickly over,
Send me, quick, Tuoni’s row-boat,
Help me cross this fatal river,
Cross the channel of Manala.”

Spake the daughter of Tuoni,
Mana’s maiden thus replying:
“Thou art sure a stupid fellow,
Foresight wanting, judgment lacking,
Having neither wit nor wisdom,
Coming here without a reason,
Coming to Tuoni’s empire;
Better far if thou shouldst journey
To thy distant home and kindred;
Many they that visit Mana,
Few return from Mana’s kingdom.”

Spake the good old Wainamoinen:
“Women old retreat from danger,
Not a man of any courage,
Not the weakest of the heroes.
Bring thy boat, Tuoni’s daughter,
Tiny maiden of Manala,
Come and row me o’er the ferry.”

Mana’s daughter does as bidden,
Brings her boat to Wainamoinen,
Quickly rows him through the channel,
O’er the black and fatal river,
To the kingdom of Manala,
Speaks these words to the magician:
“Woe to thee! O Wainamoinen!
Wonderful indeed, thy magic,
Since thou comest to Manala,
Comest neither dead nor dying.”

Tuonetar, the death-land hostess,
Ancient hostess of Tuoni,
Brings him pitchers filled with strong-beer,
Fills her massive golden goblets,
Speaks these measures to the stranger:
“Drink, thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Drink the beer of king Tuoni!”

Wainamoinen, wise and cautious,
Carefully inspects the liquor,
Looks a long time in the pitchers,
Sees the spawning of the black-frogs,
Sees the young of poison-serpents,
Lizards, worms, and writhing adders,
Thus addresses Tuonetar:
“Have not come with this intention,
Have not come to drink thy poisons,
Drink the beer of Tuonela;
Those that drink Tuoni’s liquors,
Those that sip the cups of Mana,
Court the Devil and destruction,
End their lives in want and ruin.”
Tuonetar makes this answer:
“Ancient minstrel, Wainamoinen,
Tell me what has brought thee hither,
Brought thee to the realm of Mana,
To the courts of Tuonela,
Ere Tuoni sent his angels
To thy home in Kalevala,
There to cut thy magic life-thread.”
Spake the singer, Wainamoinen:
“I was building me a vessel,
At my craft was working, singing,
Needed three words of the Master,
How to fasten in the ledges,
How the stern should be completed,
How complete the boat’s forecastle.
This the reason of my coming
To the empire of Tuoni,
To the castles of Manala:
Came to learn these magic sayings,
Learn the lost-words of the Master.”
Spake the hostess, Tuonetar:
“Mana never gives these sayings,
Canst not learn them from Tuoni,
Not the lost-words of the Master;
Thou shalt never leave this kingdom,
Never in thy magic life-time,
Never go to Kalevala,
To Wainola’s peaceful meadows.
To thy distant home and country.”

Quick the hostess, Tuonetar,
Waves her magic wand of slumber
O’er the head of Wainamoinen,
Puts to rest the wisdom-hero,
Lays him on the couch of Mana,
In the robes of living heroes,
Deep the sleep that settles o’er him.
In Manala lived a woman,
In the kingdom of Tuoni,
Evil witch and toothless wizard,
Spinner of the threads of iron,
Moulder of the bands of copper,
Weaver of a hundred fish-nets,
Of a thousand nets of copper,
Spinning in the days of summer,
Weaving in the winter evenings,
Seated on a rock in water.

In the kingdom of Tuoni
Lived a man, a wicked wizard,
Three the fingers of the hero,
Spinner he of iron meshes,
Maker too of nets of copper,
Countless were his nets of metal,
Moulded on a rock in water,
Through the many days of summer.

Mana’s son with crooked fingers,
Iron-pointed, copper fingers,
Pulls of nets, at least a thousand,
Through the river of Tuoni,
Sets them lengthwise, sets them crosswise,
In the fatal, darksome river,
That the sleeping Wainamoinen,
Friend and brother of the waters,
May not leave the isle of Mana,
Never in the course of ages,
Never leave the death-land castles,
Never while the moonlight glimmers
On the empire of Tuoni.

Wainamoinen, wise and wary,
Rising from his couch of slumber,
Speaks these words as he is waking:
“Is there not some mischief brewing,
Am I not at last in danger,
In the chambers of Tuoni,
In the Manala home and household?”

Quick he changes his complexion,
Changes too his form and feature,
Slips into another body;
Like a serpent in a circle,
Rolls black-dyed upon the waters;
Like a snake among the willows,
Crawls he like a worm of magic,
Like an adder through the grasses,
Through the coal-black stream of death-land,
Through a thousand nets of copper
Interlaced with threads of iron,
From the kingdom of Tuoni,
From the castles of Manala.

Mana’s son, the wicked wizard,
With his iron-pointed fingers,
In the early morning hastens
To his thousand nets of copper,
Set within the Tuoni river,
Finds therein a countless number
Of the death-stream fish and serpents;
Does not find old Wainamoinen,
Wainamoinen, wise and wary,
Friend and fellow of the waters.

When the wonder-working hero
Had escaped from Tuonela,
Spake he thus in supplication:
“Gratitude to thee, O Ukko,
Do I bring for thy protection!
Never suffer other heroes,
Of thy heroes not the wisest,
To transgress the laws of nature;
Never let another singer,
While he lives within the body,
Cross the river of Tuoni,
As thou lovest thy creations.
Many heroes cross the channel,
Cross the fatal stream of Mana,
Few return to tell the story,
Few return from Tuonela,
From Manala’s courts and castles.”

Wainamoinen calls his people,
On the plains of Kalevala,
Speaks these words of ancient wisdom,
To the young men, to the maidens,
To the rising generation:
“Every child of Northland, listen:
If thou wishest joy eternal,
Never disobey thy parents,
Never evil treat the guiltless,
Never wrong the feeble-minded,
Never harm thy weakest fellow,
Never stain thy lips with falsehood,
Never cheat thy trusting neighbor,
Never injure thy companion,
Lest thou surely payest penance
In the kingdom of Tuoni,
In the prison of Manala;
There, the home of all the wicked,
There the couch of the unworthy,
There the chambers of the guilty.
Underneath Manala’s fire-rock
Are their ever-flaming couches,
For their pillows hissing serpents,
Vipers green their writhing covers,
For their drink the blood of adders,
For their food the pangs of hunger,
Pain and agony their solace;
If thou wishest joy eternal,
Shun the kingdom of Tuoni!”




RUNE XVII.
WAINAMOINEN FINDS THE LOST-WORD.


Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Did not learn the words of magic
In Tuoni’s gloomy regions,
In the kingdom of Manala.
Thereupon he long debated,
Well considered, long reflected,
Where to find the magic sayings;
When a shepherd came to meet him,
Speaking thus to Wainamoinen:
“Thou canst find of words a hundred,
Find a thousand wisdom-sayings,
In the mouth of wise Wipunen,
In the body of the hero;
To the spot I know the foot-path,
To his tomb the magic highway,
Trodden by a host of heroes;
Long the distance thou must travel,
On the sharpened points of needles;
Then a long way thou must journey
On the edges of the broadswords;
Thirdly thou must travel farther
On the edges of the hatchets.”

Wainamoinen, old and trustful,
Well considered all these journeys,
Travelled to the forge and smithy,
Thus addressed the metal-worker:
“Ilmarinen, worthy blacksmith,
Make a shoe for me of iron,
Forge me gloves of burnished copper,
Mold a staff of strongest metal,
Lay the steel upon the inside,
Forge within the might of magic;
I am going on a journey
To procure the magic sayings,
Find the lost-words of the Master,
From the mouth of the magician,
From the tongue of wise Wipunen.”
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:
“Long ago died wise Wipunen,
Disappeared these many ages,
Lays no more his snares of copper,
Sets no longer traps of iron,
Cannot learn from him the wisdom,
Cannot find in him the lost-words.”

Wainamoinen, old and hopeful,
Little heeding, not discouraged,
In his metal shoes and armor,
Hastens forward on his journey,
Runs the first day fleetly onward,
On the sharpened points of needles;
Wearily he strides the second,
On the edges of the broadswords
Swings himself the third day forward,
On the edges of the hatchets.

Wise Wipunen, wisdom-singer,
Ancient bard, and great magician,
With his magic songs lay yonder,
Stretched beside him, lay his sayings,
On his shoulder grew the aspen,
On each temple grew the birch-tree,
On his mighty chin the alder,
From his beard grew willow-bushes,
From his mouth the dark green fir-tree,
And the oak-tree from his forehead.

Wainamoinen, coming closer,
Draws his sword, lays bare his hatchet
From his magic leathern scabbard,
Fells the aspen from his shoulder,
Fells the birch-tree from his temples,
From his chin he fells the alder,
From his beard, the branching willows,
From his mouth the dark-green fir-tree,
Fells the oak-tree from his forehead.

Now he thrusts his staff of iron
Through the mouth of wise Wipunen,
Pries his mighty jaws asunder,
Speaks these words of master-magic:
“Rise, thou master of magicians,
From the sleep of Tuonela,
From thine everlasting slumber!”

Wise Wipunen, ancient singer,
Quickly wakens from his sleeping,
Keenly feels the pangs of torture,
From the cruel staff of iron;
Bites with mighty force the metal,
Bites in twain the softer iron,
Cannot bite the steel asunder,
Opens wide his mouth in anguish.
Wainamoinen of Wainola,
In his iron-shoes and armor,
Careless walking, headlong stumbles
In the spacious mouth and fauces
Of the magic bard, Wipunen.
Wise Wipunen, full of song-charms,
Opens wide his mouth and swallows
Wainamoinen and his magic,
Shoes, and staff, and iron armor.
Then outspeaks the wise Wipunen:
“Many things before I’ve eaten,
Dined on goat, and sheep, and reindeer,
Bear, and ox, and wolf, and wild-boar,
Never in my recollection,
Have I tasted sweeter morsels!”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Now I see the evil symbols,
See misfortune hanging o’er me,
In the darksome Hisi-hurdles,
In the catacombs of Kalma.”

Wainamoinen long considered
How to live and how to prosper,
How to conquer this condition.
In his belt he wore a poniard,
With a handle hewn from birch-wood,
From the handle builds a vessel,
Builds a boat through magic science;
In this vessel rows he swiftly
Through the entrails of the hero,
Rows through every gland and vessel
Of the wisest of magicians.
Old Wipunen, master-singer,
Barely feels the hero’s presence,
Gives no heed to Wainamoinen.
Then the artist of Wainola
Straightway sets himself to forging,
Sets at work to hammer metals;
Makes a smithy from his armor,
Of his sleeves he makes the bellows,
Makes the air-valve from his fur-coat,
From his stockings, makes the muzzle,
Uses knees instead of anvil,
Makes a hammer of his fore-arm;
Like the storm-wind roars the bellows,
Like the thunder rings the anvil;
Forges one day, then a second,
Forges till the third day closes,
In the body of Wipunen,
In the sorcerer’s abdomen.

Old Wipunen, full of magic,
Speaks these words in wonder, guessing:
“Who art thou of ancient heroes,
Who of all the host of heroes?
Many heroes I have eaten,
And of men a countless number,
Have not eaten such as thou art;
Smoke arises from my nostrils,
From my mouth the fire is streaming,
In my throat are iron-clinkers.

“Go, thou monster, hence to wander,
Flee this place, thou plague of Northland,
Ere I go to seek thy mother,
Tell the ancient dame thy mischief;
She shall bear thine evil conduct,
Great the burden she shall carry;
Great a mother’s pain and anguish,
When her child runs wild and lawless;
Cannot comprehend the meaning,
Nor this mystery unravel,
Why thou camest here, O monster,
Camest here to give me torture.
Art thou Hisi sent from heaven,
Some calamity from Ukko?
Art, perchance, some new creation,
Ordered here to do me evil?
If thou art some evil genius,
Some calamity from Ukko,
Sent to me by my Creator,
Then am I resigned to suffer;
God does not forsake the worthy,
Does not ruin those that trust him,
Never are the good forsaken.
If by man thou wert created,
If some hero sent thee hither,
I shall learn thy race of evil,
Shall destroy thy wicked tribe-folk.

“Thence arose the violation,
Thence arose the first destruction,
Thence came all the evil-doings:
From the neighborhood of wizards,
From the homes of the magicians,
From the caves of vicious spirits,
From the haunts of fortune-tellers,
From the cabins of the witches,
From the castles of Tuoni,
From the bottom of Manala,
From the ground with envy swollen,
From Ingratitude’s dominions,
From the rocky shoals and quicksands,
From the marshes filled with danger,
From the cataract’s commotion,
From the bear-caves in the mountains,
From the wolves within the thickets,
From the roarings of the pine-tree,
From the burrows of the fox-dog,
From the woodlands of the reindeer,
From the caves and Hisi-hurdles,
From the battles of the giants,
From uncultivated pastures,
From the billows of the oceans,
From the streams of boiling waters,
From the waterfalls of Rutya,
From the limits of the storm-clouds,
From the pathways of the thunders,
From the flashings of the lightnings,
From the distant plains of Pohya,
From the fatal stream and whirlpool,
From the birthplace of Tuoni.

“Art thou coming from these places?
Hast thou, evil, hastened hither,
To the heart of sinless hero,
To devour my guiltless body,
To destroy this wisdom-singer?
Get thee hence, thou dog of Lempo,
Leave, thou monster from Manala,
Flee from mine immortal body,
Leave my liver, thing of evil,
In my body cease thy forging,
Cease this torture of my vitals,
Let me rest in peace and slumber.

“Should I want in means efficient,
Should I lack the magic power
To outroot thine evil genius,
I shall call a better hero,
Call upon a higher power,
To remove this dire misfortune,
To annihilate this monster.
I shall call the will of woman,
From the fields, the old-time heroes,
Mounted heroes from the sand-hills,
Thus to rescue me from danger,
From these pains and ceaseless tortures.

“If this force prove inefficient,
Should not drive thee from my body,
Come, thou forest, with thy heroes,
Come, ye junipers and pine-trees,
With your messengers of power,
Come, ye mountains, with your wood-nymphs,
Come, ye lakes, with all your mermaids,
Come, ye hundred ocean-spearmen,
Come, torment this son of Hisi,
Come and kill this evil monster.

“If this call is inefficient,
Does not drive thee from my vitals,
Rise, thou ancient water-mother,
With thy blue-cap from the ocean,
From the seas, the lakes, the rivers,
Bring protection to thy hero,
Comfort bring and full assistance,
That I guiltless may not suffer,
May not perish prematurely.

“Shouldst thou brave this invocation,
Kapè, daughter of Creation,
Come, thou beauteous, golden maiden,
Oldest of the race of women,
Come and witness my misfortunes,
Come and turn away this evil,
Come, remove this biting torment,
Take away this plague of Piru.

“If this call be disregarded,
If thou wilt not leave me guiltless,
Ukko, on the arch of heaven,
In the thunder-cloud dominions,
Come thou quickly, thou art needed,
Come, protect thy tortured hero,
Drive away this magic demon,
Banish ever his enchantment,
With his sword and flaming furnace,
With his fire-enkindling bellows.

“Go, thou demon, hence to wander,
Flee, thou plague of Northland heroes;
Never come again for shelter,
Nevermore build thou thy dwelling
In the body of Wipunen;
Take at once thy habitation
To the regions of thy kindred,
To thy distant fields and firesides;
When thy journey thou hast ended,
Gained the borders of thy country,
Gained the meads of thy Creator,
Give a signal of thy coming,
Rumble like the peals of thunder,
Glisten like the gleam of lightning,
Knock upon the outer portals,
Enter through the open windows,
Glide about the many chambers,
Seize the host and seize the hostess,
Knock their evil heads together,
Wring their necks and hurl their bodies
To the black-dogs of the forest.

“Should this prove of little value,
Hover like the bird of battle,
O’er the dwellings of the master,
Scare the horses from the mangers,
From the troughs affright the cattle,
Twist their tails, and horns, and forelocks,
Hurl their carcasses to Lempo.

“If some scourge the winds have sent me,
Sent me on the air of spring-tide,
Brought me by the frosts of winter,
Quickly journey whence thou camest,
On the air-path of the heavens,
Perching not upon some aspen,
Resting not upon the birch-tree;
Fly away to copper mountains,
That the copper-winds may nurse thee,
Waves of ether, thy protection.

“Didst those come from high Jumala,
From the hems of ragged snow-clouds,
Quick ascend beyond the cloud-space,
Quickly journey whence thou camest,
To the snow-clouds, crystal-sprinkled,
To the twinkling stars of heaven;
There thy fire may burn forever,
There may flash thy forked lightnings,
In the Sun’s undying furnace.

“Wert thou sent here by the spring-floods,
Driven here by river-torrents?
Quickly journey whence thou camest,
Quickly hasten to the waters,
To the borders of the rivers,
To the ancient water-mountain,
That the floods again may rock thee,
And thy water-mother nurse thee.

“Didst thou come from Kalma’s kingdom,
From the castles of the death-land?
Haste thou back to thine own country,
To the Kalma-halls and castles,
To the fields with envy swollen,
Where contending armies perish.

“Art thou from the Hisi-woodlands,
From ravines in Lempo’s forest,
From the thickets of the pine-wood,
From the dwellings of the fir-glen?
Quick retrace thine evil footsteps
To the dwellings of thy master,
To the thickets of thy kindred;
There thou mayest dwell at pleasure,
Till thy house decays about thee,
Till thy walls shall mould and crumble.

“Evil genius, thee I banish,
Got thee hence, thou horrid monster,
To the caverns of the white-bear,
To the deep abysm of serpents,
To the vales, and swamps, and fenlands,
To the ever-silent waters,
To the hot-springs of the mountains,
To the dead-seas of the Northland,
To the lifeless lakes and rivers,
To the sacred stream and whirlpool.

“Shouldst thou find no place of resting,
I will banish thee still farther,
To the Northland’s distant borders,
To the broad expanse of Lapland,
To the ever-lifeless deserts,
To the unproductive prairies,
Sunless, moonless, starless, lifeless,
In the dark abyss of Northland;
This for thee, a place befitting,
Pitch thy tents and feast forever
On the dead plains of Pohyola.

“Shouldst thou find no means of living,
I will banish thee still farther,
To the cataract of Rutya,
To the fire-emitting whirlpool,
Where the firs are ever falling,
To the windfalls of the forest;
Swim hereafter in the waters
Of the fire-emitting whirlpool,
Whirl thou ever in the current
Of the cataract’s commotion,
In its foam and boiling waters.

“Should this place be unbefitting,
I will drive thee farther onward,
To Tuoni’s coal-black river,
To the endless stream of Mana,
Where thou shalt forever linger;
Thou canst never leave Manala,
Should I not thy head deliver,
Should I never pay thy ransom;
Thou canst never safely journey
Through nine brother-rams abutting,
Through nine brother-bulls opposing,
Through nine brother-stallions thwarting,
Thou canst not re-cross Death-river
Thickly set with iron netting,
Interlaced with threads of copper.

“Shouldst thou ask for steeds for saddle,
Shouldst thou need a fleet-foot courser,
I will give thee worthy racers,
I will give thee saddle-horses;
Evil Hisi has a charger,
Crimson mane, and tail, and foretop,
Fire emitting from his nostrils,
As he prances through his pastures;
Hoofs are made of strongest iron,
Legs are made of steel and copper,
Quickly scales the highest mountains,
Darts like lightning through the valleys,
When a skilful master rides him.

“Should this steed be insufficient,
I will give thee Lempo’s snow-shoes,
Give thee Hisi’s shoes of elm-wood,
Give to thee the staff of Piru,
That with these thou mayest journey
Into Hisi’s courts and castles,
To the woods and fields of Juutas;
If the rocks should rise before thee,
Dash the flinty rocks in pieces,
Hurl the fragments to the heavens;
If the branches cross thy pathway,
Make them turn aside in greeting;
If some mighty hero hail thee,
Hurl him headlong to the woodlands.

“Hasten hence, thou thing of evil,
Heinous monster, leave my body,
Ere the breaking of the morning
Ere the Sun awakes from slumber,
Ere the sinning of the cuckoo;
Haste away, thou plague of Northland,
Haste along the track of moonbeams,
Wander hence, forever wander,
To the darksome fields of Pohya.

“If at once thou dost not leave me,
I will send the eagle’s talons,
Send to thee the beaks of vultures,
To devour thine evil body,
Hurl thy skeleton to Hisi.
Much more quickly cruel Lempo
Left my vitals when commanded,
When I called the aid of Ukko,
Called the help of my Creator.
Flee, thou motherless offendant,
Flee, thou fiend of Sariola,
Flee, thou hound without a master,
Ere the morning sun arises,
Ere the Moon withdraws to slumber!”

Wainamoinen, ancient hero,
Speaks at last to old Wipunen:
“Satisfied am I to linger
In these old and spacious caverns,
Pleasant here my home and dwelling;
For my meat I have thy tissues,
Have thy heart, and spleen, and liver,
For my drink the blood of ages,
Goodly home for Wainamoinen.

“I shall set my forge and bellows
Deeper, deeper in thy vitals;
I shall swing my heavy hammer,
Swing it with a greater power
On thy heart, and lungs, and liver;
I shall never, never leave thee
Till I learn thine incantations,
Learn thy many wisdom-sayings,
Learn the lost-words of the Master;
Never must these words be hidden,
Earth must never lose this wisdom,
Though the wisdom-singers perish.”

Old Wipunen, wise magician,
Ancient prophet, filled with power,
Opens full his store of knowledge,
Lifts the covers from his cases,
Filled with old-time incantations,
Filled with songs of times primeval,
Filled with ancient wit and wisdom;
Sings the very oldest folk-songs,
Sings the origin of witchcraft,
Sings of Earth and its beginning,
Sings the first of all creations,
Sings the source of good and evil,
Sung alas! by youth no longer,
Only sung in part by heroes
In these days of sin and sorrow.
Evil days our land befallen.
Sings the orders of enchantment.
How, upon the will of Ukko,
By command of the Creator,
How the air was first divided,
How the water came from ether,
How the earth arose from water,
How from earth came vegetation,
Fish, and fowl, and man, and hero.

Sings again the wise Wipunen,
How the Moon was first created,
How the Sun was set in heaven,
Whence the colors of the rainbow,
Whence the ether’s crystal pillars,
How the skies with stars were sprinkled.

Then again sings wise Wipunen,
Sings in miracles of concord,
Sings in magic tones of wisdom,
Never was there heard such singing;
Songs he sings in countless numbers,
Swift his notes as tongues of serpents,
All the distant hills re-echo;
Sings one day, and then a second,
Sings a third from dawn till evening,
Sings from evening till the morning;
Listen all the stars of heaven,
And the Moon stands still and listens
Fall the waves upon the deep-sea,
In the bay the tides cease rising,
Stop the rivers in their courses,
Stops the waterfall of Rutya,
Even Jordan ceases flowing,
And the Wuoksen stops and listens.

When the ancient Wainamoinen
Well had learned the magic sayings,
Learned the ancient songs and legends,
Learned the words of ancient wisdom,
Learned the lost-words of the Master,
Well had learned the secret doctrine,
He prepared to leave the body
Of the wisdom-bard, Wipunen,
Leave the bosom of the master,
Leave the wonderful enchanter.
Spake the hero, Wainamoinen:
“O, thou Antero Wipunen,
Open wide thy mouth and fauces,
I have found the magic lost-words,
I will leave thee now forever,
Leave thee and thy wondrous singing,
Will return to Kalevala,
To Wainola’s fields and firesides.”
Thus Wipunen spake in answer:
“Many are the things I’ve eaten,
Eaten bear, and elk, and reindeer,
Eaten ox, and wolf, and wild-boar,
Eaten man, and eaten hero,
Never, never have I eaten
Such a thing as Wainamoinen;
Thou hast found what thou desirest,
Found the three words of the Master;
Go in peace, and ne’er returning,
Take my blessing on thy going.”

Thereupon the bard Wipunen
Opens wide his mouth, and wider;
And the good, old Wainamoinen
Straightway leaves the wise enchanter,
Leaves Wipunen’s great abdomen;
From the mouth he glides and journeys
O’er the hills and vales of Northland,
Swift as red-deer of the forest,
Swift as yellow-breasted marten,
To the firesides of Wainola,
To the plains of Kalevala.

Straightway hastes he to the smithy
Of his brother, Ilmarinen,
Thus the iron-artist greets him:
“Hast thou found the long-lost wisdom,
Hast thou heard the secret doctrine,
Hast thou learned the master magic,
How to fasten in the ledges,
How the stern should be completed,
How complete the ship’s forecastle?”
Wainamoinen thus made answer:
“I have learned of words a hundred,
Learned a thousand incantations,
Hidden deep for many ages,
Learned the words of ancient wisdom,
Found the keys of secret doctrine,
Found the lost-words of the Master.”

Wainamoinen, magic-builder,
Straightway journeys to his vessel,
To the spot of magic labor,
Quickly fastens in the ledges,
Firmly binds the stern together
And completes the boat’s forecastle.
Thus the ancient Wainamoinen
Built the boat with magic only,
And with magic launched his vessel,
Using not the hand to touch it,
Using not the foot to move it,
Using not the knee to turn it,
Using nothing to propel it.
Thus the third task was completed,
For the hostess of Pohyola,
Dowry for the Maid of Beauty
Sitting on the arch of heaven,
On the bow of many colors.




RUNE XVIII.
THE RIVAL SUITORS.


Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Long considered, long debated,
How to woo and win the daughter
Of the hostess of Pohyola,
How to lead the Bride of Beauty,
Fairy maiden of the rainbow,
To the meadows of Wainola,
From the dismal Sariola.

Now he decks his magic vessel,
Paints the boat in blue and scarlet,
Trims in gold the ship’s forecastle,
Decks the prow in molten silver;
Sings his magic ship down gliding,
On the cylinders of fir-tree;
Now erects the masts of pine-wood,
On each mast the sails of linen,
Sails of blue, and white, and scarlet,
Woven into finest fabric.

Wainamoinen, the magician,
Steps aboard his wondrous vessel,
Steers the bark across the waters,
On the blue back of the broad-sea,
Speaks these words in sailing northward,
Sailing to the dark Pohyola:
“Come aboard my ship, O Ukko,
Come with me, thou God of mercy,
To protect thine ancient hero,
To support thy trusting servant,
On the breasts of raging billows,
On the far out-stretching waters.

“Rock, O winds, this wondrous vessel,
Causing not a single ripple;
Rolling waves, bear ye me northward,
That the oar may not be needed
In my journey to Pohyola,
O’er this mighty waste of waters.”

Ilmarinen’s beauteous sister,
Fair and goodly maid, Annikki,
Of the Night and Dawn, the daughter,
Who awakes each morning early,
Rises long before the daylight,
Stood one morning on the sea-shore,
Washing in the foam her dresses,
Rinsing out her silken ribbons,
On the bridge of scarlet color,
On the border of the highway,
On a headland jutting seaward,
On the forest-covered island.
Here Annikki, looking round her,
Looking through the fog and ether,
Looking through the clouds of heaven,
Gazing far out on the blue-sea,
Sees the morning sun arising,
Glimmering along the billows,
Looks with eyes of distant vision
Toward the sunrise on the waters,
Toward the winding streams of Suomi,
Where the Wina-waves were flowing.

There she sees, on the horizon,
Something darkle in the sunlight,
Something blue upon the billows,
Speaks these words in wonder guessing:
“What is this upon the surges,
What this blue upon the waters,
What this darkling in the sunlight?
’Tis perhaps a flock of wild-geese,
Or perchance the blue-duck flying;
Then upon thy wings arising,
Fly away to highest heaven.

“Art thou then a shoal of sea-trout,
Or perchance a school of salmon?
Dive then to the deep sea-bottom,
In the waters swim and frolic.

“Art thou then a cliff of granite,
Or perchance a mighty oak-tree,
Floating on the rough sea-billows?
May the floods then wash and beat thee,
Break thee to a thousand fragments.”

Wainamoinen, sailing northward,
Steers his wondrous ship of magic
Toward the headland jutting seaward,
Toward the island forest-covered.

Now Annikki, goodly maiden,
Sees it is the magic vessel
Of a wonderful enchanter,
Of a mighty bard and hero,
And she asks this simple question:
“Art thou then my father’s vessel,
Or my brother’s ship of magic?
Haste away then to thy harbor,
To thy refuge in Wainola.
Hast thou come a goodly distance?
Sail then farther on thy journey,
Point thy prow to other waters.”

It was not her father’s vessel,
Not a sail-boat from the distance,
’Twas the ship of Wainamoinen,
Bark of the eternal singer;
Sails within a hailing distance,
Swims still nearer o’er the waters,
Brings one word and takes another,
Brings a third of magic import.

Speaks the goodly maid, Annikki,
Of the Night and Dawn, the daughter,
To the sailor of the vessel:
“Whither sailest, Wainamoinen,
Whither bound, thou friend of waters,
Pride and joy of Kalevala?”

From the vessel Wainamoinen
Gives this answer to the maiden:
“I have come to catch some sea-trout,
Catch the young and toothsome whiting,
Hiding in these reeds and rushes.”
This the answer of Annikki:

“Do not speak to me in falsehood,
Know I well the times of fishing;
Long ago my honored father
Was a fisherman in Northland,
Came to catch the trout and whiting,
Fished within these seas and rivers.
Very well do I remember
How the fisherman disposes,
How he rigs his fishing vessel,
Lines, and gaffs, and poles, and fish-nets;
Hast not come a-fishing hither.
Whither goest, Wainamoinen,
Whither sailest, friend of waters?”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“I have come to catch some wild-geese,
Catch the hissing birds of Suomi,
In these far-extending borders,
In the Sachsensund dominions.”
Good Annikki gives this answer:
“Know I well a truthful speaker,
Easily detect a falsehood;
Formerly my aged father
Often came a-hunting hither,
Came to hunt the hissing wild-geese,
Hunt the red-bill of these waters.
Very well do I remember
How the hunter rigs his vessel,
Bows, and arrows, knives, and quiver,
Dogs enchained within the vessel,
Pointers hunting on the sea-shore,
Setters seeking in the marshes;
Tell the truth now Wainamoinen,
Whither is thy vessel sailing?”
Spake the hero of the Northland:
“To the wars my ship is sailing,
To the bloody fields of battle,
Where the streams run scarlet-colored,
Where the paths are paved with bodies.”
These the words of fair Annikki:
“Know I well the paths to battle;
Formerly my aged father
Often sounded war’s alarum,
Often led the hosts to conquest;
In each ship a hundred rowers,
And in arms a thousand heroes,
On the prow a thousand cross-bows,
Swords, and spears, and battle-axes;
Know I well the ship of battle.
Speak no longer fruitless falsehoods,
Whither sailest, Wainamoinen,
Whither steerest, friend of waters?”
These the words of Wainamoinen:
“Come, O maiden, to my vessel,
In my magic ship be seated,
Then I’ll give thee truthful answer.”

Thus Annikki, silver-tinselled,
Answers ancient Wainamoinen:
“With the winds I’ll fill thy vessel,
To thy bark I’ll send the storm-winds
And capsize thy ship of magic,
Break in pieces its forecastle,
If the truth thou dost not tell me,
If thou dost not cease thy falsehoods,
If thou dost not tell me truly
Whither sails thy magic vessel.”
These the words of Wainamoinen:
“Now I make thee truthful answer,
Though at first I spake deception:
I am sailing to the Northland
To the dismal Sariola,
Where the ogres live and flourish,
Where they drown the worthy heroes,
There to woo the Maid of Beauty
Sitting on the bow of heaven,
Woo and win the fairy virgin,
Bring her to my home and kindred,
To the firesides of Wainola.”

Then Annikki, graceful maiden,
Of the Night and Dawn, the daughter,
As she heard the rightful answer,
Knew the truth was fully spoken,
Straightway left her coats unbeaten,
Left unwashed her linen garments,
Left unrinsed her silks and ribbons
On the highway by the sea-shore,
On the bridge of scarlet color;
On her arm she threw her long-robes,
Hastened off with speed of roebuck
To the shops of Ilmarinen,
To the iron-forger’s furnace,
To the blacksmith’s home and smithy,
Here she found the hero-artist,
Forging out a bench of iron,
And adorning it with silver.
Soot lay thick upon his forehead,
Soot and coal upon his shoulders.

On the threshold speaks Annikki,
These the words his sister uses:
“Ilmarinen, dearest brother,
Thou eternal artist-forger,
Forge me now a loom of silver,
Golden rings to grace my fingers,
Forge me gold and silver ear-rings,
Six or seven golden girdles,
Golden crosslets for my bosom,
For my head forge golden trinkets,
And I’ll tell a tale surprising,
Tell a story that concerns thee
Truthfully I’ll tell the story.”

Then the blacksmith Ilmarinen
Spake and these the words he uttered:
“If thou’lt tell the tale sincerely,
I will forge the loom of silver,
Golden rings to grace thy fingers,
Forge thee gold and silver ear-rings,
Six or seven golden girdles,
Golden crosslets for thy bosom,
For thy head forge golden trinkets;
But if thou shouldst tell me falsely,
I shall break thy beauteous jewels,
Break thine ornaments in pieces,
Hurl them to the fire and furnace,
Never forge thee other trinkets.”
This the answer of Annikki:
“Ancient blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Dost thou ever think to marry
Her already thine affianced,
Beauteous Maiden of the Rainbow,
Fairest virgin of the Northland,
Chosen bride of Sariola?
Shouldst thou wish the Maid of Beauty,
Thou must forge, and forge unceasing,
Hammering the days and nights through;
Forge the summer hoofs for horses,
Forge them iron hoofs for winter,
In the long nights forge the snow-sledge,
Gaily trim it in the daytime,
Haste thou then upon thy journey
To thy wooing in the Northland,
To the dismal Sariola;
Thither journeys one more clever,
Sails another now before thee,
There to woo thy bride affianced,
Thence to lead thy chosen virgin,
Woo and win the Maid of Beauty;
Three long years thou hast been wooing.
Wainamoinen now is sailing
On the blue back of the waters,
Sitting at his helm of copper;
On the prow are golden carvings,
Beautiful his boat of magic,
Sailing fleetly o’er the billows,
To the never-pleasant Northland,
To the dismal Sariola.”

Ilmarinen stood in wonder,
Stood a statue at the story;
Silent grief had settled o’er him,
Settled o’er the iron-artist;
From one hand the tongs descended,
From the other fell the hammer,
As the blacksmith made this answer:
“Good Annikki, worthy sister,
I shall forge the loom of silver,
Golden rings to grace thy fingers,
Forge thee gold and silver ear-rings,
Six or seven golden girdles,
Golden crosslets for thy bosom;
Go and heat for me the bath-room,
Fill with heat the honey-chambers,
Lay the faggots on the fire-place,
Lay the smaller woods around them,
Pour some water through the ashes,
Make a soap of magic virtue,
Thus to cleanse my blackened visage,
Thus to cleanse the blacksmith’s body,
Thus remove the soot and ashes.”

Then Annikki, kindly sister,
Quickly warmed her brother’s bath-room,
Warmed it with the knots of fir-trees,
That the thunder-winds had broken;
Gathered pebbles from the fire-stream,
Threw them in the heating waters;
Broke the tassels from the birch-trees,
Steeped the foliage in honey,
Made a lye from milk and ashes,
Made of these a strong decoction,
Mixed it with the fat and marrow
Of the reindeer of the mountains,
Made a soap of magic virtue,
Thus to cleanse the iron-artist,
Thus to beautify the suitor,
Thus to make the hero worthy.

Ilmarinen, ancient blacksmith,
The eternal metal-worker,
Forged the wishes of his sister,
Ornaments for fair Annikki,
Rings, and bracelets, pins and ear-drops,
Forged for her six golden girdles,
Forged a weaving loom of silver,
While the maid prepared the bath-room,
Set his toilet-room in order.

To the maid he gave the trinkets,
Gave the loom of molten silver,
And the sister thus made answer:
“I have heated well thy bath-room,
Have thy toilet-things in order,
Everything as thou desirest;
Go prepare thyself for wooing,
Lave thy head to flaxen whiteness,
Make thy cheeks look fresh and ruddy,
Lave thyself in Love’s aroma,
That thy wooing prove successful.”

Ilmarinen, magic artist,
Quick repairing to his bath-room,
Bathed his head to flaxen whiteness,
Made his cheeks look fresh and ruddy,
Laved his eyes until they sparkled
Like the moonlight on the waters;
Wondrous were his form and features,
And his cheeks like ruddy berries.
These the words of Ilmarinen:
“Fair Annikki, lovely sister,
Bring me now my silken raiment,
Bring my best and richest vesture,
Bring me now my softest linen,
That my wooing prove successful.”

Straightway did the helpful sister
Bring the finest of his raiment,
Bring the softest of his linen,
Raiment fashioned by his mother;
Brought to him his silken stockings,
Brought him shoes of marten-leather,
Brought a vest of sky-blue color,
Brought him scarlet-colored trousers,
Brought a coat with scarlet trimming,
Brought a red shawl trimmed in ermine
Fourfold wrapped about his body;
Brought a fur-coat made of seal-skin,
Fastened with a thousand bottons,
And adorned with countless jewels;
Brought for him his magic girdle,
Fastened well with golden buckles,
That his artist-mother fashioned;
Brought him gloves with golden wristlets,
That the Laplanders had woven
For a head of many ringlets;
Brought the finest cap in Northland,
That his ancient father purchased
When he first began his wooing.

Ilmarinen, blacksmith-artist,
Clad himself to look his finest,
When he thus addressed a servant:
“Hitch for me a fleet-foot racer,
Hitch him to my willing snow-sledge,
For I start upon a journey
To the distant shores of Pohya,
To the dismal Sariola.”
Spake the servant thus in answer:
“Thou hast seven fleet-foot racers,
Munching grain within their mangers,
Which of these shall I make ready?”
Spake the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:
“Take the fleetest of my coursers,
Put the gray steed in the harness,
Hitch him to my sledge of magic;
Place six cuckoos on the break-board,
Seven bluebirds on the cross-bars,
Thus to charm the Northland maidens,
Thus to make them look and listen,
As the cuckoos call and echo.
Bring me too my largest bear-skin,
Fold it warm about the cross-bench;
Bring me then my marten fur-robes,
As a cover and protection.”

Straightway then the trusty servant
Of the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Put the gray steed in the harness,
Hitched the racer to the snow-sledge,
Placed six cuckoos on the break-board,
Seven bluebirds on the cross-bars,
On the front to sing and twitter;
Then he brought the largest bear-skin,
Folded it upon the cross-bench;
Brought the finest robes of marten,
Warm protection for the master.

Ilmarinen, forger-artist,
The eternal metal-worker,
Earnestly entreated Ukko:
“Send thy snow-flakes, Ukko, father,
Let them gently fall from heaven,
Let them cover all the heather,
Let them hide the berry-bushes,
That my sledge may glide in freedom
O’er the hills to Sariola!”

Ukko sent the snow from heaven,
Gently dropped the crystal snow-flakes,
Lending thus his kind assistance
To the hero, Ilmarinen,
On his journey to the Northland.

Reins in hand, the ancient artist
Seats him in his metal snow-sledge,
And beseeches thus his Master:
“Good luck to my reins and traces,
Good luck to my shafts and runners!
God protect my magic snow-sledge,
Be my safeguard on my journey
To the dismal Sariola!”

Now the ancient Ilmarinen
Draws the reins upon the racer,
Snaps his whip above the courser,
To the gray steed gives this order,
And the charger plunges northward:
“Haste away, my flaxen stallion,
Haste thee onward, noble white-face,
To the never-pleasant Pohya,
To the dreary Sariola!”

Fast and faster flies the fleet-foot,
On the curving snow-capped sea-coast,
On the borders of the lowlands,
O’er the alder-hills and mountains.
Merrily the steed flies onward,
Bluebirds singing, cuckoos calling,
On the sea-shore looking northward,
Through the sand and falling snow-flakes
Blinding winds, and snow, and sea-foam,
Cloud the hero, Ilmarinen,
As he glides upon his journey,
Looking seaward for the vessel
Of the ancient Wainamoinen;
Travels one day, then a second,
Travels all the next day northward,
Till the third day Ilmarinen
Overtakes old Wainamoinen,
Hails him in his magic vessel,
And addresses thus the minstrel:
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Let us woo in peace the maiden,
Fairest daughter of the Northland,
Sitting on the bow of heaven,
Let each labor long to win her,
Let her wed the one she chooses,
Him selecting, let her follow.”
Wainamoinen thus makes answer:
“I agree to thy proposal,
Let us woo in peace the maiden,
Not by force, nor faithless measures,
Shall we woo the Maid of Beauty,
Let her follow him she chooses;
Let the unsuccessful suitor
Harbor neither wrath nor envy
For the hero that she follows.”

Thus agreeing, on they journey,
Each according to his pleasure;
Fleetly does the steed fly onward,
Quickly flies the magic vessel,
Sailing on the broad-sea northward;
Ilmarinen’s fleet-foot racer
Makes the hills of Northland tremble,
As he gallops on his journey
To the dismal Sariola.

Wainamoinen calls the South-winds,
And they fly to his assistance;
Swiftly sails his ship of beauty,
Swiftly plows the rough sea-billows
In her pathway to Pohyola.

Time had gone but little distance,
Scarce a moment had passed over,
Ere the dogs began their barking,
In the mansions of the Northland,
In the courts of Sariola,
Watch-dogs of the court of Louhi;
Never had they growled so fiercely,
Never had they barked so loudly,
Never with their tails had beaten
Northland into such an uproar.
Spake the master of Pohyola:
“Go and learn, my worthy daughter,
Why the watch-dogs have been barking,
Why the black-dog signals danger.”
Quickly does the daughter answer:
“I am occupied, dear father,
I have work of more importance,
I must tend my flock of lambkins,
I must turn the nether millstone,
Grind to flour the grains of barley,
Run the grindings through the sifter,
Only have I time for grinding.”

Lowly growls the faithful watch-dog,
Seldom does he growl so strangely.
Spake the master of Pohyola:
“Go and learn, my trusted consort,
Why the Northland dogs are barking,
Why the black-dog signals danger.”
Thus his aged wife makes answer:
“Have no time, nor inclination,
I must feed my hungry household,
Must prepare a worthy dinner,
I must bake the toothsome biscuit,
Knead the dough till it is ready,
Only have I strength for kneading.”
Spake the master of Pohyola:
“Dames are always in a hurry,
Maidens too are ever busy,
Whether warming at the oven,
Or asleep upon their couches;
Go my son, and learn the danger,
Why the black-dog growls displeasure.”
Quickly does the son give answer:
“Have no time, nor inclination,
Am in haste to grind my hatchet;
I must chop this log to cordwood,
For the fire must cut the faggots,
I must split the wood in fragments,
Large the pile and small the fire-wood,
Only have I strength for chopping.”

Still the watch-dog growls in anger,
Growl the whelps within the mansion,
Growl the dogs chained in the kennel,
Growls the black-dog on the hill-top,
Setting Northland in an uproar.
Spake the master of Pohyola:
“Never, never does my black-dog
Growl like this without a reason;
Never does he bark for nothing,
Does not growl at angry billows,
Nor the sighing of the pine-trees.”

Then the master of Pohyola
Went himself to learn the reason
For the barking of the watch-dogs;
Strode he through the spacious court-yard,
Through the open fields beyond it,
To the summit of the uplands.
Looking toward his black-dog barking,
He beholds the muzzle pointed
To a distant, stormy hill-top,
To a mound with alders covered;
There he learned the rightful reason,
Why his dogs had barked so loudly,
Why had growled the wool-tail bearer,
Why his whelps had signalled danger.
At full sail, he saw a vessel,
And the ship was scarlet-colored,
Entering the bay of Lempo;
Saw a sledge of magic colors,
Gliding up the curving sea-shore,
O’er the snow-fields of Pohyola.

Then the master of the Northland
Hastened straightway to his dwelling,
Hastened forward to his court-room,
These the accents of the master:
“Often strangers journey hither,
On the blue back of the ocean,
Sailing in a scarlet vessel,
Rocking in the bay of Lempo;
Often strangers come in sledges
To the honey-lands of Louhi.”

Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“How shall we obtain a token
Why these strangers journey hither?
My beloved, faithful daughter,
Lay a branch upon the fire-place,
Let it burn with fire of magic;
If it trickle drops of scarlet,
War and bloodshed do they bring us;
If it trickle drops of water,
Peace and plenty bring the strangers.”

Northland’s fair and slender maiden,
Beautiful and modest daughter,
Lays a sorb-branch on the fire-place,
Lights it with the fire of magic;
Does not trickle drops of scarlet,
Trickles neither blood, nor water,
From the wand come drops of honey.

From the corner spake Suowakko,
This the language of the wizard:
“If the wand is dripping honey,
Then the strangers that are coming
Are but worthy friends and suitors.”

Then the hostess of the Northland,
With the daughter of the hostess,
Straightway left their work, and hastened
From their dwelling to the court-yard;
Looked about in all directions,
Turned their eyes upon the waters,
Saw a magic-colored vessel
Rocking slowly in the harbor,
Having sailed the bay of Lempo,
Triple sails, and masts, and rigging,
Sable was the nether portion,
And the upper, scarlet-colored,
At the helm an ancient hero
Leaning on his oars of copper;
Saw a fleet-foot racer running,
Saw a red sledge lightly follow,
Saw the magic sledge emblazoned,
Guided toward the courts of Louhi;
Saw and heard six golden cuckoos
Sitting on the break-board, calling,
Seven bluebirds richly colored
Singing from the yoke and cross-bar;
In the sledge a magic hero,
Young, and strong, and proud, and handsome,
Holding reins upon the courser.
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Dearest daughter, winsome maiden,
Dost thou wish a noble suitor?
Should these heroes come to woo thee,
Wouldst thou leave thy home and country,
Be the bride of him that pleases,
Be his faithful life-companion?

“He that comes upon the waters,
Sailing in a magic vessel,
Having sailed the bay of Lempo,
Is the good, old Wainamoinen;
In his ship are countless treasures,
Richest presents from Wainola.

“He that rides here in his snow-sledge
In his sledge of magic beauty,
With the cuckoos and the bluebirds,
Is the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Cometh hither empty-handed,
Only brings some wisdom-sayings.
When they come within the dwelling,
Bring a bowl of honeyed viands,
Bring a pitcher with two handles,
Give to him that thou wouldst follow;
Give it to old Wainamoinen,
Him that brings thee countless treasures,
Costly presents in his vessel,
Priceless gems from Kalevala.”

Spake the Northland’s lovely daughter,
This the language of the maiden:
“Good, indeed, advice maternal,
But I will not wed for riches,
Wed no man for countless treasures;
For his worth I’ll choose a husband,
For his youth and fine appearance,
For his noble form and features;
In the olden times the maidens
Were not sold by anxious mothers
To the suitors that they loved not.
I shall choose without his treasures
Ilmarinen for his wisdom,
For his worth and good behavior,
Him that forged the wondrous Sampo,
Hammered thee the lid in colors.”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Senseless daughter, child of folly,
Thus to choose the ancient blacksmith,
From whose brow drips perspiration,
Evermore to rinse his linen,
Lave his hands, and eyes, and forehead,
Keep his ancient house in order;
Little use his wit and wisdom
When compared with gold and silver.”
This the answer of the daughter:
“I will never, never, never,
Wed the ancient Wainamoinen
With his gold and priceless jewels;
Never will I be a helpmate
To a hero in his dotage,
Little thanks my compensation.”

Wainamoinen, safely landing
In advance of Ilmarinen,
Pulls his gaily-covered vessel
From the waves upon the sea-beach,
On the cylinders of birch-wood,
On the rollers copper-banded,
Straightway hastens to the guest-room
Of the hostess of Pohyola,
Of the master of the Northland,
Speaks these words upon the threshold
To the famous Maid of Beauty:
“Come with me, thou lovely virgin,
Be my bride and life-companion,
Share with me my joys and sorrows,
Be my honored wife hereafter!”
This the answer of the maiden:
“Hast thou built for me the vessel,
Built for me the ship of magic
From the fragments of the distaff,
From the splinters of the spindle?”
Wainamoinen thus replying:
“I have built the promised vessel,
Built the wondrous ship for sailing,
Firmly joined the parts by magic;
It will weather roughest billows,
Will outlive the winds and waters,
Swiftly glide upon the blue-back
Of the deep and boundless ocean;
It will ride the waves in beauty,
Like an airy bubble rising,
Like a cork on lake and river,
Through the angry seas of Northland,
Through Pohyola’s peaceful waters.”

Northland’s fair and slender daughter
Gives this answer to her suitor:
“Will not wed a sea-born hero,
Do not care to rock the billows,
Cannot live with such a husband;
Storms would bring us pain and trouble,
Winds would rack our hearts and temples;
Therefore thee I cannot follow,
Cannot keep thy home in order,
Cannot be thy life-companion,
Cannot wed old Wainamoinen.”




RUNE XIX.
ILMARINEN’S WOOING.


Ilmarinen, hero-blacksmith,
The eternal metal-worker,
Hastens forward to the court-room
Of the hostess of Pohyola,
Of the master of the Northland,
Hastens through the open portals
Into Louhi’s home and presence.
Servants come with silver pitchers,
Filled with Northland’s richest brewing;
Honey-drink is brought and offered
To the blacksmith of Wainola,
Ilmarinen thus replying:
“I shall not in all my life-time
Taste the drink that thou hast brought me,
Till I see the Maid of Beauty,
Fairy Maiden of the Rainbow;
I will drink with her in gladness,
For whose hand I journey hither.”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Trouble does the one selected
Give to him that wooes and watches;
Not yet are her feet in sandals,
Thine affianced is not ready.
Only canst thou woo my daughter,
Only canst thou win the maiden,
When thou hast by aid of magic
Plowed the serpent-field of Hisi,
Plowed the field of hissing vipers,
Touching neither beam nor handles.
Once this field was plowed by Piru,
Lempo furrowed it with horses,
With a plowshare made of copper,
With a beam of flaming iron;
Never since has any hero
Brought this field to cultivation.”

Ilmarinen of Wainola
Straightway hastens to the chamber
Of the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Speaks these words in hesitation:
“Thou of Night and Dawn the daughter,
Tell me, dost thou not remember
When for thee I forged the Sampo,
Hammered thee the lid in colors?
Thou didst swear by oath the strongest,
By the forge and by the anvil,
By the tongs and by the hammer,
In the ears of the Almighty,
And before omniscient Ukko,
Thou wouldst follow me hereafter,
Be my bride, my life-companion,
Be my honored wife forever.
Now thy mother is exacting,
Will not give to me her daughter,
Till by means of magic only,
I have plowed the field of serpents,
Plowed the hissing soil of Hisi.”

The affianced Bride of Beauty
Gives this answer to the suitor:
“O, thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
The eternal wonder-forger,
Forge thyself a golden plowshare,
Forge the beam of shining silver,
And of copper forge the handles;
Then with ease, by aid of magic,
Thou canst plow the field of serpents,
Plow the hissing soil of Hisi.”

Ilmarinen, welcome suitor,
Straightway builds a forge and smithy,
Places gold within the furnace,
In the forge he lays the silver,
Forges then a golden plowshare,
Forges, too, a beam of silver,
Forges handles out of copper,
Forges boots and gloves of iron,
Forges him a mail of metal,
For his limbs a safe protection,
Safe protection for his body.
Then a horse of fire selecting,
Harnesses the flaming stallion,
Goes to plow the field of serpents,
Plow the viper-lands of Hisi.
In the field were countless vipers,
Serpents there of every species,
Crawling, writhing, hissing, stinging,
Harmless all against the hero,
Thus he stills the snakes of Lempo:
“Vipers, ye by God created,
Neither best nor worst of creatures,
Ye whose wisdom comes from Ukko,
And whose venom comes from Hisi,
Ukko is your greater Master,
By His will your heads are lifted;
Get ye hence before my plowing,
Writhe ye through the grass and stubble,
Crawl ye to the nearest thicket,
Keep your heads beneath the heather,
Hunt your holes to Mana’s kingdom
If your poison-heads be lifted,
Then will mighty Ukko smite them
With his iron-pointed arrows,
With the lightning of his anger.”

Thus the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Safely plows the field of serpents,
Lifts the vipers in his plowing,
Buries them beneath the furrow,
Harmless all against his magic.
When the task had been completed,
Ilmarinen, quick returning,
Thus addressed Pohyola’s hostess:
“I have plowed the field of Hisi,
Plowed the field of hissing serpents,
Stilled and banished all the vipers;
Give me, ancient dame, thy daughter,
Fairest maiden of the Northland.”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Shall not grant to thee my daughter,
Shall not give my lovely virgin,
Till Tuoni’s bear is muzzled,
Till Manala’s wolf is conquered,
In the forests of the Death-land,
In the boundaries of Mana.
Hundreds have been sent to hunt him,
So one yet has been successful,
All have perished in Manala.”

Thereupon young Ilmarinen
To the maiden’s chamber hastens,
Thus addresses his affianced:
“Still another test demanded,
I must go to Tuonela,
Bridle there the bear of Mana,
Bring him from the Death-land forests,
From Tuoni’s grove and empire!”
This advice the maiden gives him:
“O thou artist, Ilmarinen,
The eternal metal-worker,
Forge of steel a magic bridle,
On a rock beneath the water,
In the foaming triple currents;
Make the straps of steel and copper,
Bridle then the bear of Mana,
Lead him from Tuoni’s forests.”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Forged of steel a magic bridle,
On a rock beneath the water,
In the foam of triple currents;
Made the straps of steel and copper,
Straightway went the bear to muzzle,
In the forests of the Death-land,
Spake these words in supplication:
“Terhenetar, ether-maiden,
Daughter of the fog and snow-flake,
Sift the fog and let it settle
O’er the hills and lowland thickets,
Where the wild-bear feeds and lingers,
That he may not see my coming,
May not hear my stealthy footsteps!”

Terhenetar hears his praying,
Makes the fog and snow-flake settle
On the coverts of the wild-beasts;
Thus the bear he safely bridles,
Fetters him in chains of magic,
In the forests of Tuoni,
In the blue groves of Manala.

When this task had been completed,
Ilmarinen, quick returning,
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:
“Give me, worthy dame, thy daughter,
Give me now my bride affianced,
I have brought the bear of Mana
From Tuoni’s fields and forests.”

Spake the hostess of Pohyola
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:
“I will only give my daughter,
Give to thee the Maid of Beauty,
When the monster-pike thou catchest
In the river of Tuoni,
In Manala’s fatal waters,
Using neither hooks, nor fish-nets,
Neither boat, nor fishing-tackle;
Hundreds have been sent to catch him,
No one yet has been successful,
All have perished in Manala.”

Much disheartened, Ilmarinen
Hastened to the maiden’s chamber,
Thus addressed the rainbow-maiden:
“Now a third test is demanded,
Much more difficult than ever;
I must catch the pike of Mana,
In the river of Tuoni,
And without my fishing-tackle,
Hard the third test of the hero!”
This advice the maiden gives him:
“O thou hero, Ilmarinen,
Never, never be discouraged:
In thy furnace, forge an eagle,
From the fire of ancient magic;
He will catch the pike of Mana,
Catch the monster-fish in safety,
From the death-stream of Tuoni,
From Manala’s fatal waters.”

Then the suitor, Ilmarinen,
The eternal artist-forgeman,
In the furnace forged an eagle
From the fire of ancient wisdom;
For this giant bird of magic
Forged he talons out of iron,
And his beak of steel and copper;
Seats himself upon the eagle,
On his back between the wing-bones,
Thus addresses he his creature,
Gives the bird of fire this order:
“Mighty eagle, bird of beauty,
Fly thou whither I direct thee,
To Tuoni’s coal-black river,
To the blue deeps of the Death-stream,
Seize the mighty fish of Mana,
Catch for me this water-monster.”

Swiftly flies the magic eagle,
Giant-bird of worth and wonder,
To the river of Tuoni,
There to catch the pike of Mana;
One wing brushes on the waters,
While the other sweeps the heavens;
In the ocean dips his talons,
Whets his beak on mountain-ledges.

Safely landing, Ilmarinen,
The immortal artist-forger,
Hunts the monster of the Death-stream,
While the eagle hunts and fishes
In the waters of Manala.
From the river rose a monster,
Grasped the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Tried to drag him to his sea-cave;
Quick the eagle pounced upon him,
With his metal-beak he seized him,
Wrenched his head, and rent his body,
Hurled him back upon the bottom
Of the deep and fatal river,
Freed his master, Ilmarinen.

Then arose the pike of Mana,
Came the water-dog in silence,
Of the pikes was not the largest,
Nor belonged he to the smallest;
Tongue the length of double hatchets,
Teeth as long as fen-rake handles,
Mouth as broad as triple streamlets,
Back as wide as seven sea-boats,
Tried to snap the magic blacksmith,
Tried to swallow Ilmarinen.
Swiftly swoops the mighty eagle,
Of the birds was not the largest,
Nor belonged he to the smallest;
Beak a hundred fathoms measured,
Mouth as wide as seven streamlets,
Tongue as long as seven javelins,
Like five crooked scythes his talons;
Swoops upon the pike of Mana.
Quick the giant fish endangered,
Darts and flounders in the river,
Dragging down the mighty eagle,
Lashing up the very bottom
To the surface of the river;
When the mighty bird uprising
Leaves the wounded pike in water,
Soars aloft on worsted pinions
To his home in upper ether;
Soars awhile, and sails, and circles,
Circles o’er the reddened waters,
Swoops again on lightning-pinions,
Strikes with mighty force his talons
Into the shoulder of his victim;
Strikes the second of his talons
On the flinty mountain-ledges,
On the rocks with iron hardened;
From the cliffs rebound his talons,
Slip the flinty rocks o’erhanging,
And the monster-pike resisting
Dives again beneath the surface
To the bottom of the river,
From the talons of the eagle;
Deep, the wounds upon the body
Of the monster of Tuoni.
Still a third time soars the eagle,
Soars, and sails, and quickly circles,
Swoops again upon the monster,
Fire out-shooting from his pinions,
Both his eyeballs flashing lightning;
With his beak of steel and copper
Grasps again the pike of Mana;
Firmly planted are his talons
In the rocks and in his victim,
Drags the monster from the river,
Lifts the pike above the waters,
From Tuoni’s coal-black river,
From the blue-back of Manala.

Thus the third time does the eagle
Bring success from former failures;
Thus at last the eagle catches
Mana’s pike, the worst of fishes,
Swiftest swimmer of the waters,
From the river of Tuoni;
None could see Manala’s river,
For the myriad of fish-scales;
Hardly could one see through ether,
For the feathers of the eagle,
Relicts of the mighty contest.

Then the bird of copper talons
Took the pike, with scales of silver,
To the pine-tree’s topmost branches,
To the fir-tree plumed with needles,
Tore the monster-fish in pieces,
Ate the body of his victim,
Left the head for Ilmarinen.
Spake the blacksmith to the eagle:
“O thou bird of evil nature,
What thy thought and what thy motive?
Thou hast eaten what I needed,
Evidence of my successes;
Thoughtless eagle, witless instinct,
Thus to mar the spoils of conquest!”

But the bird of metal talons
Hastened onward, soaring upward,
Rising higher into ether,
Rising, flying, soaring, sailing,
To the borders of the long-clouds,
Made the vault of ether tremble,
Split apart the dome of heaven,
Broke the colored bow of Ukko,
Tore the Moon-horns from their sockets,
Disappeared beyond the Sun-land,
To the home of the triumphant.

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Took the pike-head to the hostess
Of the ever-dismal Northland,
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:
“Let this head forever serve thee
As a guest-bench for thy dwelling,
Evidence of hero-triumphs;
I have caught the pike of Mana,
I have done as thou demandest,
Three my victories in Death-land,
Three the tests of magic heroes;
Wilt thou give me now thy daughter,
Give to me the Maid of Beauty?”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Badly is the test accomplished,
Thou has torn the pike in pieces,
From his neck the head is severed,
Of his body thou hast eaten,
Brought to me this worthless relic!”
These the words of Ilmarinen:
“When the victory is greatest,
Do we suffer greatest losses!
From the river of Tuoni,
From the kingdom of Manala,
I have brought to thee this trophy,
Thus the third task is completed.
Tell me is the maiden ready,
Wilt thou give the bride affianced?”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“I will give to thee my daughter,
Will prepare my snow-white virgin,
For the suitor, Ilmarinen;
Thou hast won the Maid of Beauty,
Bride is she of thine hereafter,
Fit companion of thy fireside,
Help and joy of all thy lifetime.”

On the floor a child was sitting,
And the babe this tale related.
“There appeared within this dwelling,
Came a bird within the castle,
From the East came flying hither,
From the East, a monstrous eagle,
One wing touched the vault of heaven,
While the other swept the ocean;
With his tail upon the waters,
Reached his beak beyond the cloudlets,
Looked about, and eager watching,
Flew around, and sailing, soaring,
Flew away to hero-castle,
Knocked three times with beak of copper
On the castle-roof of iron;
But the eagle could not enter.

“Then the eagle, looking round him,
Flew again, and sailed, and circled,
Flew then to the mothers’ castle,
Loudly rapped with heavy knocking
On the mothers’ roof of copper;
But the eagle could not enter.

“Then the eagle, looking round him,
Flew a third time, sailing, soaring,
Flew then to the virgins’ castle,
Knocked again with beak of copper,
On the virgins’ roof of linen,
Easy for him there to enter;
Flew upon the castle-chimney,
Quick descending to the chamber,
Pulled the clapboards from the studding,
Tore the linen from the rafters,
Perched upon the chamber-window,
Near the walls of many colors,
On the cross-bars gaily-feathered,
Looked upon the curly-headed,
Looked upon their golden ringlets,
Looked upon the snow-white virgins,
On the purest of the maidens,
On the fairest of the daughters,
On the maid with pearly necklace,
On the maiden wreathed in flowers;
Perched awhile, and looked, admiring,
Swooped upon the Maid of Beauty,
On the purest of the virgins,
On the whitest, on the fairest,
On the stateliest and grandest,
Swooped upon the rainbow-daughter
Of the dismal Sariola;
Grasped her in his mighty talons,
Bore away the Maid of Beauty,
Maid of fairest form and feature,
Maid adorned with pearly necklace,
Decked in feathers iridescent,
Fragrant flowers upon her bosom,
Scarlet band around her forehead,
Golden rings upon her fingers,
Fairest maiden of the Northland.”

Spake the hostess of Pohyola,
When the babe his tale had ended:
“Tell me how, my child beloved,
Thou hast learned about the maiden,
Hast obtained the information,
How her flaxen ringlets nestled,
How the maiden’s silver glistened,
How the virgin’s gold was lauded.
Shone the silver Sun upon thee,
Did the moonbeams bring this knowledge?”
From the floor the child made answer:
“Thus I gained the information,
Moles of good-luck led me hither,
To the home of the distinguished,
To the guest-room of the maiden,
Good-name bore her worthy father,
He that sailed the magic vessel;
Better-name enjoyed the mother,
She that baked the bread of barley,
She that kneaded wheaten biscuits,
Fed her many guests in Northland.

“Thus the information reached me,
Thus the distant stranger heard it,
Heard the virgin had arisen:
Once I walked within the court-yard,
Stepping near the virgin’s chamber,
At an early hour of morning,
Ere the Sun had broken slumber;
Whirling rose the soot in cloudlets,
Blackened wreaths of smoke came rising
From the chamber of the maiden,
From thy daughter’s lofty chimney;
There the maid was busy grinding,
Moved the handles of the millstone
Making voices like the cuckoo,
Like the ducks the side-holes sounded,
And the sifter like the goldfinch,
Like the sea-pearls sang the grindstones.

“Then a second time I wandered
To the border of the meadow;
In the forest was the maiden
Rocking on a fragrant hillock,
Dyeing red in iron vessels,
And in copper kettles, yellow.

“Then a third time did I wander
To the lovely maiden’s window;
There I saw thy daughter weaving,
Heard the flying of her shuttle,
Heard the beating of her loom-lathe,
Heard the rattling of her treddles,
Heard the whirring of her yarn-reel.”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Now alas! beloved daughter,
I have often taught this lesson:
‘Do not sing among the pine-trees,
Do not call adown the valleys,
Do not hang thy head in walking,
Do not bare thine arms, nor shoulders,
Keep the secrets of thy bosom,
Hide thy beauty and thy power.’

“This I told thee in the autumn,
Taught thee in the summer season,
Sang thee in the budding spring-time,
Sang thee when the snows were falling:
‘Let us build a place for hiding,
Let us build the smallest windows,
Where may weave my fairest daughter,
Where my maid may ply her shuttle,
Where my joy may work unnoticed
By the heroes of the Northland,
By the suitors of Wainola.’”

From the floor the child made answer,
Fourteen days the young child numbered:
“Easy ’tis to hide a war-horse
In the Northland fields and stables;
Hard indeed to hide a maiden,
Having lovely form and features!
Build of stone a distant castle
In the middle of the ocean,
Keep within thy lovely maiden,
Train thou there thy winsome daughter,
Not long hidden canst thou keep her.
Maidens will not grow and flourish,
Kept apart from men and heroes,
Will not live without their suitors,
Will not thrive without their wooers;
Thou canst never hide a maiden,
Neither on the land nor water.”

Now the ancient Wainamoinen,
Head down-bent and heavy-hearted,
Wanders to his native country,
To Wainola’s peaceful meadows,
To the plains of Kalevala,
Chanting as he journeys homeward:
“I have passed the age for wooing,
Woe is me, rejected suitor,
Woe is me, a witless minstrel,
That I did not woo and marry,
When my face was young and winsome,
When my hand was warm and welcome!
Youth dethrones my age and station,
Wealth is nothing, wisdom worthless,
When a hero goes a-wooing
With a poor but younger brother.
Fatal error that a hero
Does not wed in early manhood,
In his youth does not be master
Of a worthy wife and household.”

Thus the ancient Wainamoinen
Sends the edict to his people:
“Old men must not go a-wooing,
Must not swim the sea of anger,
Must not row upon a wager,
Must not run a race for glory,
With the younger sons of Northland.”




RUNE XX.
THE BREWING OF BEER.


Now we sing the wondrous legends,
Songs of wedding-feasts and dances,
Sing the melodies of wedlock,
Sing the songs of old tradition;
Sing of Ilmarinen’s marriage
To the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Fairest daughter of the Northland,
Sing the drinking-songs of Pohya.

Long prepared they for the wedding
In Pohyola’s halls and chambers,
In the courts of Sariola;
Many things that Louhi ordered,
Great indeed the preparations
For the marriage of the daughter,
For the feasting of the heroes,
For the drinking of the strangers,
For the feeding of the poor-folk,
For the people’s entertainment.

Grew an ox in far Karjala,
Not the largest, nor the smallest,
Was the ox that grew in Suomi;
But his size was all-sufficient,
For his tail was sweeping Jamen,
And his head was over Kemi,
Horns in length a hundred fathoms,
Longer than the horns his mouth was;
Seven days it took a weasel
To encircle neck and shoulders;
One whole day a swallow journeyed
From one horn-tip to the other,
Did not stop between for resting.
Thirty days the squirrel travelled
From the tail to reach the shoulders,
But he could not gain the horn-tip
Till the Moon had long passed over.

This young ox of huge dimensions,
This great calf of distant Suomi,
Was conducted from Karjala
To the meadows of Pohyola;
At each horn a hundred heroes,
At his head and neck a thousand.
When the mighty ox was lassoed,
Led away to Northland pastures,
Peacefully the monster journeyed
By the bays of Sariola,
Ate the pasture on the borders;
To the clouds arose his shoulders,
And his horns to highest heaven.
Not in all of Sariola
Could a butcher be discovered
That could kill the ox for Louhi,
None of all the sons of Northland,
In her hosts of giant people,
In her rising generation,
In the hosts of those grown older.

Came a hero from a distance,
Wirokannas from Karelen,
And these words the gray-beard uttered:
“Wait, O wait, thou ox of Suomi,
Till I bring my ancient war-club;
Then I’ll smite thee on thy forehead,
Break thy skull, thou willing victim!
Nevermore wilt thou in summer
Browse the woods of Sariola,
Bare our pastures, fields, and forests;
Thou, O ox, wilt feed no longer
Through the length and breadth of Northland,
On the borders of this ocean!”

When the ancient Wirokannas
Started out the ox to slaughter,
When Palwoinen swung his war-club,
Quick the victim turned his forehead,
Flashed his flaming eyes upon him;
To the fir-tree leaped the hero,
In the thicket hid Palwoinen,
Hid the gray-haired Wirokannas.

Everywhere they seek a butcher,
One to kill the ox of Suomi,
In the country of Karelen,
And among the Suomi-giants,
In the quiet fields of Ehstland,
On the battle-fields of Sweden,
Mid the mountaineers of Lapland,
In the magic fens of Turya;
Seek him in Tuoni’s empire,
In the death-courts of Manala.
Long the search, and unsuccessful,
On the blue back of the ocean,
On the far-outstretching pastures.

There arose from out the sea-waves,
Rose a hero from the waters,
On the white-capped, roaring breakers,
From the water’s broad expanses;
Nor belonged he to the largest,
Nor belonged he to the smallest;
Made his bed within a sea-shell,
Stood erect beneath a flour-sieve,
Hero old, with hands of iron,
And his face was copper-colored;
Quick the hero full unfolded,
Like the full corn from the kernel.
On his head a hat of flint-stone,
On his feet were sandstone-sandals,
In his hand a golden cleaver,
And the blade was copper-handled.
Thus at last they found a butcher,
Found the magic ox a slayer.
Nothing has been found so mighty
That it has not found a master.

As the sea-god saw his booty,
Quickly rushed he on his victim,
Hurled him to his knees before him,
Quickly felled the calf of Suomi,
Felled the young ox of Karelen.
Bountifully meat was furnished;
Filled at least a thousand hogsheads
Of his blood were seven boatfuls,
And a thousand weight of suet,
For the banquet of Pohyola,
For the marriage-feast of Northland.

In Pohyola was a guest-room,
Ample was the hall of Louhi,
Was in length a hundred furlongs,
And in breadth was nearly fifty;
When upon the roof a rooster
Crowed at break of early morning,
No one on the earth could hear him;
When the dog barked at one entrance,
None could hear him at the other.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Hastens to the hall and court-room,
In the centre speaks as follows:
“Whence indeed will come the liquor,
Who will brew me beer from barley,
Who will make the mead abundant,
For the people of the Northland,
Coming to my daughter’s marriage,
To her drinking-feast and nuptials?
Cannot comprehend the malting,
Never have I learned the secret,
Nor the origin of brewing.”
Spake an old man from his corner:
“Beer arises from the barley,
Comes from barley, hops, and water,
And the fire gives no assistance.
Hop-vine was the son of Remu,
Small the seed in earth was planted,
Cultivated in the loose soil,
Scattered like the evil serpents
On the brink of Kalew-waters,
On the Osmo-fields and borders.
There the young plant grew and flourished,
There arose the climbing hop-vine,
Clinging to the rocks and alders.

“Man of good-luck sowed the barley
On the Osmo hills and lowlands,
And the barley grew and flourished,
Grew and spread in rich abundance,
Fed upon the air and water,
On the Osmo plains and highlands,
On the fields of Kalew-heroes.

“Time had travelled little distance,
Ere the hops in trees were humming,
Barley in the fields was singing,
And from Kalew’s well the water,
This the language of the trio:
‘Let us join our triple forces,
Join to each the other’s powers;
Sad alone to live and struggle,
Little use in working singly,
Better we should toil together.’

“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,
Brewer of the drink refreshing,
Takes the golden grains of barley,
Taking six of barley-kernels,
Taking seven tips of hop-fruit,
Filling seven cups with water,
On the fire she sets the caldron,
Boils the barley, hops, and water,
Lets them steep, and seethe, and bubble
Brewing thus the beer delicious,
In the hottest days of summer,
On the foggy promontory,
On the island forest-covered;
Poured it into birch-wood barrels,
Into hogsheads made of oak-wood.

“Thus did Osmotar of Kalew
Brew together hops and barley,
Could not generate the ferment.
Thinking long and long debating,
Thus she spake in troubled accents:
‘What will bring the effervescence,
Who will add the needed factor,
That the beer may foam and sparkle,
May ferment and be delightful?’

“Kalevatar, magic maiden,
Grace and beauty in her fingers,
Swiftly moving, lightly stepping,
In her trimly-buckled sandals,
Steps upon the birch-wood bottom,
Turns one way, and then another,
In the centre of the caldron;
Finds within a splinter lying,
From the bottom lifts the fragment,
Turns it in her fingers, musing:
‘What may come of this I know not,
In the hands of magic maidens,
In the virgin hands of Kapo,
Snowy virgin of the Northland!’

“Kalevatar took the splinter
To the magic virgin, Kapo,
Who by unknown force and insight,
Rubbed her hands and knees together,
And produced a snow-white squirrel;
Thus instructed she her creature,
Gave the squirrel these directions:
‘Snow-white squirrel, mountain-jewel,
Flower of the field and forest,
Haste thee whither I would send thee,
Into Metsola’s wide limits,
Into Tapio’s seat of wisdom;
Hasten through the heavy tree-tops,
Wisely through the thickest branches,
That the eagle may not seize thee,
Thus escape the bird of heaven.
Bring me ripe cones from the fir-tree,
From the pine-tree bring me seedlings,
Bring them to the hands of Kapo,
For the beer of Osmo’s daughter.’

“Quickly hastened forth the squirrel,
Quickly sped the nimble broad-tail,
Swiftly hopping on its journey
From one thicket to another,
From the birch-tree to the aspen,
From the pine-tree to the willow,
From the sorb-tree to the alder,
Jumping here and there with method,
Crossed the eagle-woods in safety,
Into Metsola’s wide limits,
Into Tapio’s seat of wisdom;
There perceived three magic pine-trees,
There perceived three smaller fir-trees,
Quickly climbed the dark-green branches,
Was not captured by the eagle,
Was not mangled in his talons;
Broke the young cones from the fir-tree,
Cut the shoots of pine-tree branches,
Hid the cones within his pouches,
Wrapped them in his fur-grown mittens,
Brought them to the hands of Kapo,
To the magic virgin’s fingers.
Kapo took the cones selected,
Laid them in the beer for ferment,
But it brought no effervescence,
And the beer was cold and lifeless.

“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,
Kapo, brewer of the liquor,
Deeply thought and long considered:
‘What will bring the effervescence,
Who will lend me aid efficient,
That the beer may foam and sparkle,
May ferment and be refreshing?’

“Kalevatar, sparkling maiden,
Grace and beauty in her fingers,
Softly moving, lightly stepping,
In her trimly-buckled sandals,
Steps again upon the bottom,
Turns one way and then another,
In the centre of the caldron,
Sees a chip upon the bottom,
Takes it from its place of resting,
Looks upon the chip and muses:
‘What may come of this I know not,
In the hands of mystic maidens,
In the hands of magic Kapo,
In the virgin’s snow-white fingers.’

“Kalevatar took the birch-chip
To the magic maiden, Kapo,
Gave it to the white-faced maiden.
Kapo, by the aid of magic,
Rubbed her hands and knees together,
And produced a magic marten,
And the marten, golden-breasted;
Thus instructed she her creature,
Gave the marten these directions:
‘Thou, my golden-breasted marten,
Thou my son of golden color,
Haste thou whither I may send thee,
To the bear-dens of the mountain,
To the grottoes of the growler,
Gather yeast upon thy fingers,
Gather foam from lips of anger,
From the lips of bears in battle,
Bring it to the hands of Kapo,
To the hands of Osmo’s daughter.’

“Then the marten golden-breasted,
Full consenting, hastened onward,
Quickly bounding on his journey,
Lightly leaping through the distance
Leaping o’er the widest rivers,
Leaping over rocky fissures,
To the bear-dens of the mountain,
To the grottoes of the growler,
Where the wild-bears fight each other,
Where they pass a dread existence,
Iron rocks, their softest pillows,
In the fastnesses of mountains;
From their lips the foam was dripping,
From their tongues the froth of anger;
This the marten deftly gathered,
Brought it to the maiden, Kapo,
Laid it in her dainty fingers.

“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,
Brewer of the beer of barley,
Used the beer-foam as a ferment;
But it brought no effervescence,
Did not make the liquor sparkle.

“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,
Thought again, and long debated:
‘Who or what will bring the ferment,
That my beer may not be lifeless?’

“Kalevatar, magic maiden,
Grace and beauty in her fingers,
Softly moving, lightly stepping,
In her trimly-buckled sandals,
Steps again upon the bottom,
Turns one way and then another,
In the centre of the caldron,
Sees a pod upon the bottom,
Lifts it in her snow-white fingers,
Turns it o’er and o’er, and muses:
‘What may come of this I know not,
In the hands of magic maidens,
In the hands of mystic Kapo,
In the snowy virgin’s fingers?’

“Kalevatar, sparkling maiden,
Gave the pod to magic Kapo;
Kapo, by the aid of magic,
Rubbed the pod upon her knee-cap,
And a honey-bee came flying
From the pod within her fingers,
Kapo thus addressed her birdling:
‘Little bee with honeyed winglets,
King of all the fragrant flowers,
Fly thou whither I direct thee,
To the islands in the ocean,
To the water-cliffs and grottoes,
Where asleep a maid has fallen,
Girdled with a belt of copper;
By her side are honey-grasses,
By her lips are fragrant flowers,
Herbs and flowers honey-laden;
Gather there the sweetened juices,
Gather honey on thy winglets,
From the calyces of flowers,
From the tips of seven petals,
Bring it to the hands of Kapo,
To the hands of Osmo’s daughter.’

“Then the bee, the swift-winged birdling,
Flew away with lightning-swiftness
On his journey to the islands,
O’er the high waves of the ocean;
Journeyed one day, then a second,
Journeyed all the next day onward,
Till the third day evening brought him
To the islands in the ocean,
To the water-cliffs and grottoes;
Found the maiden sweetly sleeping,
In her silver-tinselled raiment,
Girdled with a belt of copper,
In a nameless meadow, sleeping,
In the honey-fields of magic;
By her side were honeyed grasses,
By her lips were fragrant flowers,
Silver stalks with golden petals;
Dipped its winglets in the honey,
Dipped its fingers in the juices
Of the sweetest of the flowers,
Brought the honey back to Kapo,
To the mystic maiden’s fingers.

“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,
Placed the honey in the liquor;
Kapo mixed the beer and honey,
And the wedding-beer fermented;
Rose the live beer upward, upward,
From the bottom of the vessels,
Upward in the tubs of birch-wood,
Foaming higher, higher, higher,
Till it touched the oaken handles,
Overflowing all the caldrons;
To the ground it foamed and sparkled,
Sank away in sand and gravel.

“Time had gone but little distance,
Scarce a moment had passed over,
Ere the heroes came in numbers
To the foaming beer of Northland,
Rushed to drink the sparkling liquor.
Ere all others Lemminkainen
Drank, and grew intoxicated
On the beer of Osmo’s daughter,
On the honey-drink of Kalew.

“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,
Kapo, brewer of the barley,
Spake these words in saddened accents:
‘Woe is me, my life hard-fated,
Badly have I brewed the liquor,
Have not brewed the beer in wisdom,
Will not live within its vessels,
Overflows and fills Pohyola!’

“From a tree-top sings the redbreast,
From the aspen calls the robin:
‘Do not grieve, thy beer is worthy,
Put it into oaken vessels,
Into strong and willing barrels
Firmly bound with hoops of copper.’

“Thus was brewed the beer of Northland,
At the hands of Osmo’s daughter;
This the origin of brewing
Beer from Kalew-hops and barley;
Great indeed the reputation
Of the ancient beer of Kalew,
Said to make the feeble hardy,
Famed to dry the tears of women,
Famed to cheer the broken-hearted,
Make the aged young and supple,
Make the timid brave and mighty,
Make the brave men ever braver,
Fill the heart with joy and gladness,
Fill the mind with wisdom-sayings,
Fill the tongue with ancient legends,
Only makes the fool more foolish.”

When the hostess of Pohyola
Heard how beer was first fermented,
Heard the origin of brewing,
Straightway did she fill with water
Many oaken tubs and barrels;
Filled but half the largest vessels,
Mixed the barley with the water,
Added also hops abundant;
Well she mixed the triple forces
In her tubs of oak and birch-wood,
Heated stones for months succeeding,
Thus to boil the magic mixture,
Steeped it through the days of summer,
Burned the wood of many forests,
Emptied all the springs of Pohya;
Daily did the forests lesson,
And the wells gave up their waters,
Thus to aid the hostess, Louhi,
In the brewing of the liquors,
From the water, hops, and barley,
And from honey of the islands,
For the wedding-feast of Northland,
For Pohyola’s great carousal
And rejoicings at the marriage
Of the Maiden of the Rainbow
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Metal-worker of Wainola.

Smoke is seen upon the island,
Fire, upon the promontory,
Black smoke rising to the heavens
From the fire upon the island;
Fills with clouds the half of Pohya,
Fills Karelen’s many hamlets;
All the people look and wonder,
This the chorus of the women:
“Whence are rising all these smoke-clouds,
Why this dreadful fire in Northland?
Is not like the smoke of camp-fires,
Is too large for fires of shepherds!”

Lemminkainen’s ancient mother
Journeyed in the early morning
For some water to the fountain,
Saw the smoke arise to heaven,
In the region of Pohyola,
These the words the mother uttered:
“’Tis the smoke of battle-heroes,
From the heat of warring armies!”

Even Ahti, island-hero,
Ancient wizard, Lemminkainen,
Also known as Kaukomieli,
Looked upon the scene in wonder,
Thought awhile and spake as follows:
“I would like to see this nearer,
Learn the cause of all this trouble,
Whence this smoke and great confusion,
Whether smoke from heat of battle,
Or the bonfires of the shepherds.”

Kaukomieli gazed and pondered,
Studied long the rising smoke-clouds;
Came not from the heat of battle,
Came not from the shepherd bonfires;
Heard they were the fires of Louhi
Brewing beer in Sariola,
On Pohyola’s promontory;
Long and oft looked Lemminkainen,
Strained in eagerness his vision,
Stared, and peered, and thought, and wondered,
Looked abashed and envy-swollen,
Spake these words upon his island:
“O beloved, second mother,
Northland’s well-intentioned hostess,
Brew thy beer of honey-flavor,
Make thy liquors foam and sparkle,
For thy many friends invited,
Brew it well for Lemminkainen,
For his marriage in Pohyola
With the Maiden of the Rainbow.”

Finally the beer was ready,
Beverage of noble heroes,
Stored away in casks and barrels,
There to rest awhile in silence,
In the cellars of the Northland,
In the copper-banded vessels,
In the magic oaken hogsheads,
Plugs and faucets made of copper.
Then the hostess of Pohyola
Skilfully prepared the dishes,
Laid them all with careful fingers
In the boiling-pans and kettles,
Ordered countless loaves of barley,
Ordered many liquid dishes,
All the delicacies of Northland,
For the feasting of her people,
For their richest entertainment,
For the nuptial songs and dances,
At the marriage of her daughter
With the blacksmith, Ilmarinen.

When the loaves were baked and ready,
When the dishes all were seasoned,
Time had gone but little distance,
Scarce a moment had passed over,
Ere the beer, in casks imprisoned,
Loudly rapped, and sang, and murmured:
“Come, ye heroes, come and take me,
Come and let me cheer your spirits,
Make you sing the songs of wisdom,
That with honor ye may praise me,
Sing the songs of beer immortal!”

Straightway Louhi sought a minstrel,
Magic bard and artist-singer,
That the beer might well be lauded,
Might be praised in song and honor.
First as bard they brought a salmon,
Also brought a pike from ocean,
But the salmon had no talent,
And the pike had little wisdom;
Teeth of pike and gills of salmon
Were not made for singing legends.

Then again they sought a singer,
Magic minstrel, beer-enchanter,
Thus to praise the drink of heroes,
Sing the songs of joy and gladness;
And a boy was brought for singing;
But the boy had little knowledge,
Could not praise the beer in honor;
Children’s tongues are filled with questions,
Children cannot speak in wisdom,
Cannot sing the ancient legends.

Stronger grew the beer imprisoned
In the copper-banded vessels,
Locked behind the copper faucets,
Boiled, and foamed, and sang, and murmured:
“If ye do not bring a singer,
That will sing my worth immortal,
That will sing my praise deserving,
I will burst these bands of copper,
Burst the heads of all these barrels;
Will not serve the best of heroes
Till he sings my many virtues.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Called a trusted maiden-servant,
Sent her to invite the people
To the marriage of her daughter,
These the words that Louhi uttered:
“O my trusted, truthful maiden,
Servant-maid to me belonging,
Call together all my people,
Call the heroes to my banquet,
Ask the rich, and ask the needy,
Ask the blind and deaf, and crippled,
Ask the young, and ask the aged;
Go thou to the hills, and hedges,
To the highways, and the by-ways,
Urge them to my daughter’s wedding;
Bring the blind, and sorely troubled,
In my boats upon the waters,
In my sledges bring the halting,
With the old, and sick, and needy;
Ask the whole of Sariola,
Ask the people of Karelen,
Ask the ancient Wainamoinen,
Famous bard and wisdom-singer;
But I give command explicit
Not to ask wild Lemminkainen,
Not the island-dweller, Ahti!”
This the question of the servant:
“Why not ask wild Lemminkainen,
Ancient islander and minstrel?”

Louhi gave this simple answer:
“Good the reasons that I give thee
Why the wizard, Lemminkainen,
Must not have an invitation
To my daughter’s feast and marriage:
Ahti courts the heat of battle,
Lemminkainen fosters trouble,
Skilful fighter of the virtues;
Evil thinking, acting evil,
He would bring but pain and sorrow,
He would jest and jeer at maidens
In their trimly buckled raiment,
Cannot ask the evil-minded!”
Thus again the servant questions:
“Tell me how to know this Ahti,
Also known as Lemminkainen,
That I may not ask him hither;
Do not know the isle of Ahti,
Nor the home of Kaukomieli!”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Easy ’tis to know the wizard,
Easy find the Ahti-dwelling:
Ahti lives on yonder island,
On that point dwells Lemminkainen,
In his mansion near the water,
Far at sea his home and dwelling.”

Thereupon the trusted maiden
Spread the wedding-invitations
To the people of Pohyola,
To the tribes of Kalevala;
Asked the friendless, asked the homeless
Asked the laborers and shepherds,
Asked the fishermen and hunters,
Asked the deaf, the dumb, the crippled,
Asked the young, and asked the aged,
Asked the rich, and asked the needy;
Did not give an invitation
To the reckless Lemminkainen,
Island-dweller of the ocean.




RUNE XXI.
ILMARINEN’S WEDDING-FEAST.


Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Ancient dame of Sariola,
While at work within her dwelling,
Heard the whips crack on the fenlands,
Heard the rattle of the sledges;
To the northward turned her glances,
Turned her vision to the sunlight,
And her thoughts ran on as follow:
“Who are these in bright apparel,
On the banks of Pohya-waters,
Are they friends or hostile armies?”

Then the hostess of the Northland
Looked again and well considered,
Drew much nearer to examine,
Found they were not hostile armies,
Found that they were friends and suitors.
In the midst was Ilmarinen,
Son-in-law to ancient Louhi.

When the hostess of Pohyola
Saw the son-in-law approaching,
She addressed the words that follow:
“I had thought the winds were raging,
That the piles of wood were falling,
Thought the pebbles in commotion,
Or perchance the ocean roaring;
Then I hastened nearer, nearer,
Drew still nearer and examined,
Found the winds were not in battle,
Found the piles of wood unshaken,
Found the ocean was not roaring,
Nor the pebbles in commotion;
Found my son-in-law was coming
With his heroes and attendants,
Heroes counted by the hundreds.

“Should you ask of me the question,
How I recognized the bridegroom
Mid the hosts of men and heroes,
I should answer, I should tell you:
‘As the hazel-bush in copses,
As the oak-tree in the forest,
As the Moon among the planets;
Drives the groom a coal-black courser,
Running like the famished black-dog,
Flying like the hungry raven,
Graceful as the lark at morning,
Golden cuckoos, six in number,
Twitter on the birchen cross-bow;
There are seven bluebirds singing
On the racer’s hame and collar.’”

Noises hear they in the court-yard,
On the highway hear the sledges,
To the court comes Ilmarinen,
With his body-guard of heroes;
In the midst the chosen suitor,
Not too far in front of others,
Not too far behind his fellows.
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Hie ye hither, men and heroes,
Haste, ye watchers, to the stables,
There unhitch the suitor’s stallion,
Lower well the racer’s breast-plate,
There undo the straps and buckles,
Loosen well the shafts and traces,
And conduct the suitor hither,
Give my son-in-law good welcome!”

Ilmarinen turned his racer
Into Louhi’s yard and stables,
And descended from his snow-sledge.
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Come, thou servant of my bidding,
Best of all my trusted servants,
Take at once the bridegroom’s courser
From the shafts adorned with silver,
From the curving arch of willow,
Lift the harness trimmed in copper,
Tie the white-face to the manger,
Treat the suitor’s steed with kindness,
Lead him carefully to shelter
By his soft and shining bridle,
By his halter tipped with silver;
Let him roll among the sand-hills,
On the bottoms soft and even,
On the borders of the snow-banks,
In the fields of milky color.

“Lead the hero’s steed to water,
Lead him to the Pohya-fountains,
Where the living streams are flowing,
Sweet as milk of human kindness,
From the roots of silvery birches,
Underneath the shade of aspens.

“Feed the courser of the suitor,
With the sweetest corn and barley,
On the summer-wheat and clover,
In the caldron steeped in sweetness;
Feed him at the golden manger,
In the boxes lined with copper,
At my manger richly furnished,
In the warmest of the stables;
Tie him with a silk-like halter,
To the golden rings and staples,
To the hooks of purest silver,
Set in beams of birch and oak-wood;
Feed him on the hay the sweetest,
Feed him on the corn nutritious,
Give the best my barns can furnish.

“Curry well the suitor’s courser
With the curry-comb of fish-bone,
Brush his hair with silken brushes,
Put his mane and tail in order,
Cover well with flannel blankets,
Blankets wrought in gold and silver,
Buckles forged from shining copper.

“Come, ye small lads of the village,
Lead the suitor to my chambers,
With your auburn locks uncovered,
From your hands remove your mittens,
See if ye can lead the hero
Through the door without his stooping,
Lifting not the upper cross-bar,
Lowering not the oaken threshold,
Moving not the birchen casings,
Great the hero who must enter.

“Ilmarinen is too stately,
Cannot enter through the portals,
Not the son-in-law and bridegroom,
Till the portals have been heightened;
Taller by a head the suitor
Than the door-ways of the mansion.”

Quick the servants of Pohyola
Tore away the upper cross-bar,
That his cap might not be lifted;
Made the oaken threshold lower
That the hero might not stumble;
Made the birch-wood portals wider,
Opened full the door of welcome,
Easy entrance for the suitor.

Speaks the hostess of the Northland
As the bridegroom freely passes
Through the doorway of her dwelling:
“Thanks are due to thee, O Ukko,
That my son-in-law has entered!
Let me now my halls examine;
Make the bridal chambers ready,
Finest linen on my tables,
Softest furs upon my benches,
Birchen flooring scrubbed to whiteness,
All my rooms in perfect order.”

Then the hostess of Pohyola
Visited her spacious dwelling,
Did not recognize her chambers;
Every room had been remodeled,
Changed by force of mighty magic;
All the halls were newly burnished,
Hedge-hog bones were used for ceilings,
Bones of reindeer for foundations,
Bones of wolverine for door-sills,
For the cross-bars bones of roebuck,
Apple-wood were all the rafters,
Alder-wood, the window-casings,
Scales of trout adorned the windows,
And the fires were set in flowers.
All the seats were made of silver,
All the floors of copper-tiling,
Gold-adorned were all the tables,
On the floor were silken mattings,
Every fire-place set in copper,
Every hearth-stone cut from marble,
On each shelf were colored sea-shells,
Kalew’s tree was their protection.

To the court-room came the hero,
Chosen suitor from Wainola,
These the words of Ilmarinen:
“Send, O Ukko, health and pleasure
To this ancient home and dwelling,
To this mansion richly fashioned!”
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Let thy coming be auspicious
To these halls of thee unworthy,
To the home of thine affianced,
To this dwelling lowly fashioned,
Mid the lindens and the aspens.

“Come, ye maidens that should serve me,
Come, ye fellows from the village,
Bring me fire upon the birch-bark,
Light the fagots of the fir-tree,
That I may behold the bridegroom,
Chosen suitor of my daughter,
Fairy Maiden of the Rainbow,
See the color of his eyeballs,
Whether they are blue or sable,
See if they are warm and faithful.”

Quick the young lads from the village
Brought the fire upon the birch-bark,
Brought it on the tips of pine-wood;
And the fire and smoke commingled
Roll and roar about the hero,
Blackening the suitor’s visage,
And the hostess speaks as follows:
“Bring the fire upon a taper,
On the waxen tapers bring it!”

Then the maidens did as bidden,
Quickly brought the lighted tapers,
Made the suitor’s eyeballs glisten,
Made his cheeks look fresh and ruddy;
Made his eyes of sable color
Sparkle like the foam of waters,
Like the reed-grass on the margin,
Colored as the ocean jewels,
Iridescent as the rainbow.

“Come, ye fellows of the hamlets,
Lead my son-in-law and hero
To the highest seat at table,
To the seat of greatest honor,
With his back upon the blue-wall,
Looking on my bounteous tables,
Facing all the guests of Northland.”

Then the hostess of Pohyola
Served her guests in great abundance,
Richest drinks and rarest viands,
First of all she served the bridegroom;
On his platters, honeyed biscuit,
And the sweetest river salmon,
Seasoned butter, roasted bacon,
All the dainties of Pohyola.
Then the helpers served the others,
Filled the plates of all invited
With the varied food of Northland.
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:
“Come, ye maidens from the village,
Hither bring the beer in pitchers,
In the urns with double handles,
To the many guests in-gathered,
Ere all others, serve the bridegroom.”

Thereupon the merry maidens
Brought the beer in silver pitchers
From the copper-banded vessels,
For the wedding-guests assembled;
And the beer, fermenting, sparkled
On the beard of Ilmarinen,
On the beards of many heroes.

When the guests had all partaken
Of the wondrous beer of barley,
Spake the beer in merry accents
Through the tongues of the magicians,
Through the tongue of many a hero,
Through the tongue of Wainamoinen,
Famed to be the sweetest singer
Of the Northland bards and minstrels,
These the words of the enchanter:
“O thou beer of honeyed flavor,
Let us not imbibe in silence,
Let some hero sing thy praises,
Sing thy worth in golden measures;
Let the hostess start the singing,
Let the bridegroom sound thy virtues!
Have our songs thus quickly vanished,
Have our joyful tongues grown silent?
Evil then has been the brewing,
Then the beer must be unworthy,
That it does not cheer the singer,
Does not move the merry minstrel,
That the golden guests are joyless,
And the cuckoo is not singing.
Never will these benches echo
Till the bench-guests chant thy virtues;
Nor the floor resound thy praises
Till the floor-guests sing in concord;
Nor the windows join the chorus
Till the window-guests have spoken;
All the tables will keep silence
Till the heroes toast thy virtues;
Little singing from the chimney
Till the chimney-guests have chanted.”

On the floor a child was sitting,
Thus the little boy made answer:
“I am small and young in singing,
Have perchance but little wisdom;
Be that as it may, my seniors,
Since the elder minstrels sing not,
Nor the heroes chant their legends,
Nor the hostess lead the singing,
I will sing my simple stories,
Sing my little store of knowledge,
To the pleasure of the evening,
To the joy of the invited.”

Near the fire reclined an old man,
And the gray-beard thus made answer:
“Not the time for children’s singing,
Children’s wisdom is too ready,
Children’s songs are filled with trifles,
Filled with shrewd and vain deceptions,
Maiden-songs are full of follies;
Leave the songs and incantations
To the ancient wizard-singers;
Leave the tales of times primeval
To the minstrel of Wainola,
To the hero of the Northland,
To the ancient Wainamoinen.”
Thereupon Osmoinen answered:
“Are there not some sweeter singers
In this honored congregation,
That will clasp their hands together,
Sing the ancient songs unbroken,
Thus begin the incantations,
Make these ancient halls re-echo
For the pleasure of the evening,
For the joy of the in-gathered?”
From the hearth-stone spake, the gray-beard
“Not a singer of Pohyola,
Not a minstrel, nor magician,
That was better skilled in chanting
Legends of the days departed,
Than was I when I was singing,
In my years of vain ambition;
Then I chanted tales of heroes,
On the blue back of the waters,
Sang the ballads of my people,
In the vales and on the mountains,
Through the verdant fields and forests;
Sweet my voice and skilled my singing,
All my songs were highly lauded,
Rippled like the quiet rivers,
Easy-flowing like the waters,
Easy-gliding as the snow-shoes,
Like the ship upon the ocean.

“Woe is me, my days are ended,
Would not recognize my singing,
All its sweetness gone to others,
Flows no more like rippling waters,
Makes no more the hills re-echo!
Now my songs are full of discord,
Like the rake upon the stubble,
Like the sledge upon the gravel,
Like the boat upon the sea-shore!”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Spake these words in magic measures:
“Since no other bard appeareth
That will clasp my hand in singing,
I will sing some simple legends,
Sing my garnered store of wisdom,
Make these magic halls re-echo
With my tales of ancient story,
Since a bard I was created,
Born an orator and singer;
Do not ask the ways of others,
Follow not the paths of strangers.”

Wainamoinen, famous minstrel,
Song’s eternal, wise supporter,
Then began the songs of pleasure,
Made the halls resound with joyance,
Filled the rooms with wondrous singing;
Sang the ancient bard-magician
All the oldest wisdom-sayings,
Did not fail in voice nor legends,
All the wisest thoughts remembered.

Thus the ancient Wainamoinen
Sang the joy of all assembled,
To the pleasure of the evening,
To the merriment of maidens,
To the happiness of heroes;
All the guests were stilled in wonder
At the magic of his singing,
At the songs of the magician.

Spake again wise Wainamoinen,
When his wonder-tales had ended:
“l have little worth or power,
Am a bard of little value,
Little consequence my singing,
Mine abilities as nothing,
If but Ukko, my Creator,
Should intone his wisdom-sayings,
Sing the source of good and evil,
Sing the origin of matter,
Sing the legends of omniscience,
Sing his songs in full perfection.
God could sing the floods to honey,
Sing the sands to ruddy berries,
Sing the pebbles into barley,
Sing to beer the running waters,
Sing to salt the rocks of ocean,
Into corn-fields sing the forests,
Into gold the forest-fruitage,
Sing to bread the hills and mountains,
Sing to eggs the rounded sandstones;
He could touch the springs of magic,
He could turn the keys of nature,
And produce within thy pastures,
Hurdles filled with sheep and reindeer,
Stables filled with fleet-foot stallions,
Kine in every field and fallow;
Sing a fur-robe for the bridegroom,
For the bride a coat of ermine,
For the hostess, shoes of silver,
For the hero, mail of copper.

“Grant O Ukko, my Creator,
God of love, and truth, and justice,
Grant thy blessing on our feasting,
Bless this company assembled,
For the good of Sariola,
For the happiness of Northland!
May this bread and beer bring joyance,
May they come in rich abundance,
May they carry full contentment
To the people of Pohyola,
To the cabin and the mansion;
May the hours we spend in singing,
In the morning, in the evening,
Fill our hearts with joy and gladness!
Hear us in our supplications,
Grant to us thy needed blessings,
Send enjoyment, health, and comfort,
To the people here assembled,
To the host and to the hostess,
To the bride and to the bridegroom,
To the sons upon the waters,
To the daughters at their weavings,
To the hunters on the mountains,
To the shepherds in the fenlands,
That our lives may end in honor,
That we may recall with pleasure
Ilmarinen’s magic marriage
To the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Snow-white virgin of the Northland.”




RUNE XXII.
THE BRIDE’S FAREWELL.


When the marriage was completed,
When the many guests had feasted,
At the wedding of the Northland,
At the Dismal-land carousal,
Spake the hostess of Pohyola
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:
“Wherefore, bridegroom, dost thou linger,
Why art waiting, Northland hero?
Sittest for the father’s pleasure,
For affection of the mother,
For the splendor of the maidens,
For the beauty of the daughter?
Noble son-in-law and brother,
Wait thou longer, having waited
Long already for the virgin,
Thine affianced is not ready,
Not prepared, thy life-companion,
Only are her tresses braided.

“Chosen bridegroom, pride of Pohya,
Wait thou longer, having waited
Long already for the virgin,
Thy beloved is preparing,
Only is one hand made ready.

“Famous artist, Ilmarinen,
Wait still longer, having waited
Long already for the virgin,
Thy beloved is not ready,
Only is one foot in fur-shoes,”
Spake again the ancient Louhi:
“Chosen suitor of my daughter,
Thou hast thrice in kindness waited,
Wait no longer for the virgin,
Thy beloved now is ready,
Well prepared thy life-companion,
Fairy Maiden of the Rainbow.

“Beauteous daughter, join thy suitor,
Follow him, thy chosen husband,
Very near is the uniting,
Near indeed thy separation.
At thy hand the honored bridegroom,
Near the door he waits to lead thee,
Guide thee to his home and kindred;
At the gate his steed is waiting,
Restless champs his silver bridle,
And the sledge awaits thy presence.

“Thou wert anxious for a suitor,
Ready to accept his offer,
Wert in haste to take his jewels,
Place his rings upon thy fingers;
Now, fair daughter, keep thy promise;
To his sledge, with happy footsteps,
Hie in haste to join the bridegroom,
Gaily journey to the village
With thy chosen life-companion,
With thy suitor, Ilmarinen.
Little hast thou looked about thee,
Hast not raised thine eyes above thee,
Beauteous maiden of the Northland.
Hast thou made a rueful bargain,
Full of wailing thine engagement,
And thy marriage full of sorrow,
That thy father’s ancient cottage
Thou art leaving now forever,
Leaving also friends and kindred,
For the blacksmith, Ilmarinen?

“O how beautiful thy childhood,
In thy father’s dwelling-places,
Nurtured like a tender flower,
Like the strawberry in spring-time;
Soft thy couch and sweet thy slumber,
Warm thy fires and rich thy table;
From the fields came corn in plenty,
From the highlands, milk and berries,
Wheat and barley in abundance,
Fish, and fowl, and hare, and bacon,
From thy father’s fields and forests.

“Never wert thou, child, in sorrow,
Never hadst thou grief nor trouble,
All thy cares were left to fir-trees,
All thy worry to the copses,
All thy weeping to the willows,
All thy sighing to the lindens,
All thy thinking to the aspens
And the birches on the mountains,
Light and airy as the leaflet,
As a butterfly in summer,
Ruddy as a mountain-berry,
Beautiful as vernal flowers.

“Now thou leavest home and kindred,
Wanderest to other firesides,
Goest to another mother,
Other sisters, other brothers,
Goest to a second father,
To the servant-folk of strangers,
From thy native hills and lowlands.
There and here the homes will differ,
Happier thy mother’s hearth-stone;
Other horns will there be sounded,
Other portals there swing open,
Other hinges there be creaking;
There the doors thou canst not enter
Like the daughters of Wainola,
Canst not tend the fires and ovens
As will please the minds of strangers.

“Didst thou think, my fairest maiden,
Thou couldst wed and on the morrow
Couldst return, if thou shouldst wish it,
To thy father’s court and dwelling?
Not for one, nor two, nor three days,
Wilt thou leave thy mother’s chambers,
Leave thy sisters and thy brothers,
Leave thy father’s hills and lowlands.
Long the time the wife must wander,
Many months and years must wander,
Work, and struggle, all her life long,
Even though the mother liveth.
Great, indeed, must be the changes
When thou comest back to Pohya,
Changed, thy friends and nearest kindred,
Changed, thy father’s ancient dwellings,
Changed, the valleys and the mountains,
Other birds will sing thy praises!”

When the mother thus had spoken,
Then the daughter spake, departing:
“In my early days of childhood
Often I intoned these measures:
‘Art a virgin, yet no virgin,
Guided by an aged mother,
In a brother’s fields and forests,
In the mansion of a father!
Only wilt become a virgin,
Only when thou hast a suitor,
Only when thou wedst a hero,
One foot on the father’s threshold,
And the other for the snow-sledge
That will speed thee and thy husband
To his native vales and highlands!’

“I have wished thus many summers,
Sang it often in my childhood,
Hoped for this as for the flowers,
Welcome as the birds of spring-time.
Thus fulfilled are all my wishes,
Very near is my departure,
One foot on my father’s threshold,
And the other for the journey
With my husband to his people;
Cannot understand the reason
That has changed my former feelings,
Cannot leave thee now with gladness,
Cannot go with great rejoicing
From my dear, old home and kindred,
Where as maiden I have lingered,
From the courts where I was nurtured,
From my father’s hand and guidance,
From my faithful mother’s counsel.
Now I go, a maid of sorrow,
Heavy-hearted to the bridegroom,
Like the bride of Night in winter,
Like the ice upon the rivers.

“Such is not the mind of others,
Other brides of Northland heroes;
Others do not leave unhappy,
Have no tears, nor cares, nor sorrows,
I alas! must weep and murmur,
Carry to my grave great sadness,
Heart as dark as Death’s black river.

“Such the feelings of the happy,
Such the minds of merry maidens:
Like the early dawn of spring-time,
Like the rising Sun in summer;
No such radiance awaits me,
With my young heart filled with terror;
Happiness is not my portion,
Like the flat-shore of the ocean,
Like the dark rift of the storm-cloud,
Like the cheerless nights of winter!
Dreary is the day in autumn,
Dreary too the autumn evening,
Still more dreary is my future!”

An industrious old maiden,
Ever guarding home and kindred,
Spake these words of doubtful comfort:
“Dost thou, beauteous bride, remember,
Canst thou not recall my counsels?
These the words that I have taught thee:
‘Look not joyfully for suitors,
Never heed the tongues of wooers,
Look not in the eyes of charmers,
At their feet let fall thy vision.
He that hath a mouth for sweetness,
He that hath an eye for beauty,
Offers little that will comfort;
Lempo sits upon his forehead,
In his mouth dwells dire Tuoni.’

“Thus, fair bride, did I advise thee,
Thus advised my sister’s daughter:
Should there come the best of suitors,
Noblest wooers, proudest lovers,
Give to all these wisdom-sayings,
Let thine answer be as follows:
‘Never will I think it wisdom,
Never will it be my pleasure,
To become a second daughter,
Linger with my husband’s mother;
Never shall I leave my father,
Never wander forth to bondage,
At the bidding of a bridegroom:
Never shall I be a servant,
Wife and slave to any hero,
Never will I be submissive
To the orders of a husband.’

“Fairest bride, thou didst not heed me,
Gav’st no thought to my advices,
Didst not listen to my counsel;
Wittingly thy feet have wandered
Into boiling tar and water,
Hastened to thy suitor’s snow-sledge,
To the bear-dens of thy husband,
On his sledge to be ill-treated,
Carried to his native country,
To the bondage of his people,
There, a subject to his mother.
Thou hast left thy mother’s dwelling,
To the schooling of the master;
Hard indeed the master’s teachings,
Little else than constant torture;
Ready for thee are his bridles,
Ready for thy hands the shackles,
Were not forged for any other;
Soon, indeed, thou’lt feel the hardness,
Feel the weight of thy misfortune,
Feel thy second father’s censure,
And his wife’s inhuman treatment,
Hear the cold words of thy brother,
Quail before thy haughty sister.

“Listen, bride, to what I tell thee:
In thy home thou wert a jewel,
Wert thy father’s pride and pleasure,
‘Moonlight,’ did thy father call thee,
And thy mother called thee ‘Sunshine,’
‘Sea-foam’ did thy brother call thee,
And thy sister called thee ‘Flower.’
When thou leavest home and kindred
Goest to a second mother,
Often she will give thee censure,
Never treat thee as her daughter,
Rarely will she give thee counsel,
Never will she sound thy praises.
‘Brush-wood,’ will the father call thee,
‘Sledge of Rags,’ thy husband’s mother,
‘Flight of Stairs,’ thy stranger brother,
‘Scare-crow,’ will the sister call thee,
Sister of thy blacksmith-husband;
Then wilt think of my good counsels,
Then wilt wish in tears and murmurs,
That as steam thou hadst ascended,
That as smoke thy soul had risen,
That as sparks thy life had vanished.
As a bird thou canst not wander
From thy nest to circle homeward,
Canst not fall and die like leaflets,
As the sparks thou canst not perish,
Like the smoke thou canst not vanish.

“Youthful bride, and darling sister,
Thou hast bartered all thy friendships,
Hast exchanged thy loving father,
Thou hast left thy faithful mother
For the mother of thy husband;
Hast exchanged thy loving brother,
Hast renounced thy gentle sister,
For the kindred of thy suitor;
Hast exchanged thy snow-white covers
For the rocky couch of sorrow;
Hast exchanged these crystal waters
For the waters of Wainola;
Hast renounced these sandy sea-shores
For the muddy banks of Kalew;
Northland glens thou hast forsaken
For thy husband’s barren meadows;
Thou hast left thy berry-mountains
For the stubble-fields and deserts.

“Thou, O maiden, hast been thinking
Thou wouldst happy be in wedlock;
Neither work, nor care, nor sorrow,
From this night would be thy portion,
With thy husband for protection.
Not to sleep art thou conducted,
Not to happiness, nor joyance,
Wakefulness, thy night-companion,
And thy day-attendant, trouble;
Often thou wilt drink of sorrow,
Often long for vanished pleasures.

“When at home thou hadst no head-gear,
Thou hadst also little sadness;
When thy couch was not of linen,
No unhappiness came nigh thee;
Head-gear brings but pain and sorrow,
Linen breeds bad dispositions,
Linen brings but deeps of anguish,
And the flax untimely mourning.

“Happy in her home, the maiden,
Happy at her father’s fireside,
Like the master in his mansion,
Happy with her bows and arrows.
’Tis not thus with married women;
Brides of heroes may be likened
To the prisoners of Moskva,
Held in bondage by their masters.

“As a wife, must weep and labor,
Carry trouble on both shoulders;
When the next hour passes over,
Thou must tend the fire and oven,
Must prepare thy husband’s dinner,
Must direct thy master’s servants.
When thine evening meal is ready,
Thou must search for hidden wisdom
In the brain of perch and salmon,
In the mouths of ocean whiting,
Gather wisdom from the cuckoo,
Canst not learn it from thy mother,
Mother dear of seven daughters;
Cannot find among her treasures
Where were born the human instincts,
Where were born the minds of heroes,
Whence arose the maiden’s beauty,
Whence the beauty of her tresses,
Why all life revives in spring-time.

“Weep, O weep, my pretty young bride.
When thou weepest, weep sincerely,
Weep great rivers from thine eyelids,
Floods of tears in field and fallow,
Lakelets in thy father’s dwelling;
Weep thy rooms to overflowing,
Shed thy tears in great abundance,
Lest thou weepest on returning
To thy native hills and valleys,
When thou visitest thy father
In the smoke of waning glory,
On his arm a withered tassel.

“Weep, O weep, my lovely maiden,
When thou weepest, weep in earnest,
Weep great rivers from thine eyelids;
If thou dost not weep sincerely,
Thou wilt weep on thy returning
To thy Northland home and kindred,
When thou visitest thy mother
Old and breathless near the hurdles,
In her arms a barley-bundle.

“Weep, O weep, sweet bride of beauty,
When thou weepest, weep profusely;
If thou dost not weep in earnest,
Thou wilt weep on thy returning
To thy native vales and highlands,
When thou visitest thy brother
Lying wounded by the way-side,
In his hand but empty honors.

“Weep, O weep, my sister’s daughter,
Weep great rivers from thine eyelids;
If thou dost not weep sufficient,
Thou wilt weep on thy returning
To the scenes of happy childhood,
When thou visitest thy sister
Lying, prostrate in the meadow,
In her hand a birch-wood mallet.”

When the ancient maid had ended,
Then the young bride sighed in anguish,
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,
Spake these words in deeps of sorrow:
“O, ye sisters, my beloved,
Ye companions of my childhood,
Playmates of my early summers,
Listen to your sister’s counsel:
Cannot comprehend the reason,
Why my mind is so dejected,
Why this weariness and sadness,
This untold and unseen torture,
Cannot understand the meaning
Of this mighty weight of sorrow!
Differently I had thought it,
I had hoped for greater pleasures,
I had hoped to sing as cuckoos,
On the hill-tops call and echo,
When I had attained this station,
Reached at last the goal expectant;
But I am not like the cuckoo,
Singing, merry on the hill-tops;
I am like the songless blue-duck,
As she swims upon the waters,
Swims upon the cold, cold ocean,
Icicles upon her pinions.

“Ancient father, gray-haired mother,
Whither do ye wish to lead me,
Whither take this bride, thy daughter,
That this sorrow may pass over,
Where this heavy heart may lighten,
Where this grief may turn to gladness?
Better it had been, O mother,
Hadst thou nursed a block of birch-wood,
Hadst thou clothed the colored sandstone,
Rather than this hapless maiden,
For the fulness of these sorrows,
For this keen and killing trouble.

“Many sympathizers tell me:
‘Foolish bride, thou art ungrateful,
Do not grieve, thou child of sorrow,
Thou hast little cause for weeping.’

“O, deceive me not, my people,
Do not argue with me falsely,
For alas! I have more troubles
Than the waterfalls have pebbles,
Than the Ingerland has willows,
Than the Suomi-hills have berries;
Never could the Pohya plow-horse
Pull this mighty weight of sorrow,
Shaking not his birchen cross-bar,
Breaking not his heavy collar;
Never could the Northland reindeer
Heavy shod and stoutly harnessed,
Draw this load of care and trouble.”

By the stove a babe was playing,
And the young child spake as follows:
“Why, O fair bride, art thou weeping,
Why these tears of pain and sadness?
Leave thy troubles to the elk-herds,
And thy grief to sable fillies,
Let the steeds of iron bridles
Bear the burden of thine anguish,
Horses have much larger foreheads,
Larger shoulders, stronger sinews,
And their necks are made for labor,
Stronger are their bones and muscles,
Let them bear thy heavy burdens.
There is little good in weeping,
Useless are thy tears of sorrow;
Art not led to swamps and lowlands,
Nor to banks of little rivers;
Thou art led to fields of flowers,
Led to fruitful trees and forests,
Led away from beer of Pohya
To the sweeter mead of Kalew.
At thy shoulder waits thy husband,
On thy right side, Ilmarinen,
Constant friend and life-protector,
He will guard thee from all evil;
Husband ready, steed in waiting,
Gold-and-silver-mounted harness,
Hazel-birds that sing and flutter
On the courser’s yoke and cross-bar;
Thrushes also sing and twitter
Merrily on hame and collar,
Seven bluebirds, seven cuckoos,
Sing thy wedding-march in concord.

“Be no longer full of sorrow,
Dry thy tears, thou bride of beauty,
Thou hast found a noble husband,
Better wilt thou fare than ever,
By the side of Ilmarinen,
Artist husband, metal-master,
Bread-provider of thy table,
On the arm of the fish-catcher,
On the breast of the elk-hunter,
By the side of the bear-killer.
Thou hast won the best of suitors,
Hast obtained a mighty hero;
Never idle is his cross-bow,
On the nails his quivers hang not,
Neither are his dogs in kennel,
Active agents is his hunting.
Thrice within the budding spring-time
In the early hours of morning
He arises from his fare-couch,
From his slumber in the brush-wood,
Thrice within the sowing season,
On his eyes the deer has fallen,
And the branches brushed his vesture,
And his locks been combed by fir-boughs.
Hasten homeward with thy husband,
Where thy hero’s friends await thee,
Where his forests sing thy welcome.

“Ilmarinen there possesses
All the birds that fly in mid-air,
All the beasts that haunt the woodlands,
All that feed upon the mountains,
All that graze on hill and valley,
Sheep and cattle by the thousands;
Sweet the grass upon his meadows,
Sweet the barley in his uplands,
In the lowlands corn abundant,
Wheat upon the elm-wood fallows,
Near the streamlets rye is waving,
Waving grain on many acres,
On his mountains gold and silver,
Rich his mines of shining copper,
Highlands filled with magic metals,
Chests of jewels in his store-house,
All the wealth of Kalevala.”




RUNE XXIII.
OSMOTAR THE BRIDE-ADVISER.


Now the bride must be instructed,
Who will teach the Maid of Beauty,
Who instruct the Rainbow-daughter?
Osmotar, the wisdom-maiden,
Kalew’s fair and lovely virgin,
Osmotar will give instructions
To the bride of Ilmarinen,
To the orphaned bride of Pohya,
Teach her how to live in pleasure,
How to live and reign in glory,
Win her second mother’s praises,
Joyful in her husband’s dwelling.

Osmotar in modest accents
Thus the anxious bride addresses:
“Maid of Beauty, lovely sister,
Tender plant of Louhi’s gardens,
Hear thou what thy sister teaches,
Listen to her sage instructions:
Go thou hence, my much beloved,
Wander far away, my flower,
Travel on enwrapped in colors,
Glide away in silks and ribbons,
From this house renowned and ancient,
From thy father’s halls and court-yards
Haste thee to thy husband’s village,
Hasten to his mother’s household;
Strange, the rooms in other dwellings,
Strange, the modes in other hamlets.

“Full of thought must be thy going,
And thy work be well considered,
Quite unlike thy home in Northland,
On the meadows of thy father,
On the highlands of thy brother,
Singing through thy mother’s fenlands,
Culling daisies with thy sister.

“When thou goest from thy father
Thou canst take whatever pleases,
Only three things leave behind thee:
Leave thy day-dreams to thy sister,
Leave thou kindness for thy mother,
To thy brother leave thy labors,
Take all else that thou desirest.
Throw away thine incantations,
Cast thy sighing to the pine-trees,
And thy maidenhood to zephyrs,
Thy rejoicings to the couches,
Cast thy trinkets to the children,
And thy leisure to the gray-beards,
Cast all pleasures to thy playmates,
Let them take them to the woodlands,
Bury them beneath the mountain.

“Thou must hence acquire new habits,
Must forget thy former customs,
Mother-love must be forsaken,
Thou must love thy husband’s mother,
Lower must thy head be bended,
Kind words only must thou utter.

“Thou must hence acquire new habits,
Must forget thy former customs,
Father-love must be forsaken,
Thou must love thy husband’s father,
Lower must thy head be bended,
Kind words only must thou utter.

“Thou must hence acquire new habits,
Must forget thy former customs,
Brother-love must be forsaken,
Thou must love thy husband’s brother,
Lower must thy head be bended,
Kind words only must thou utter.

“Thou must hence acquire new habits
Must forget thy former customs,
Sister-love must be forsaken,
Thou must love thy husband’s sister,
Lower must thy head be bended,
Kind words only must thou utter.

“Never in the course of ages,
Never while the moonlight glimmers,
Wickedly approach thy household,
Nor unworthily, thy servants,
Nor thy courts with indiscretion;
Let thy dwellings sing good manners,
And thy walls re-echo virtue.
After mind the hero searches,
And the best of men seek honor,
Seek for honesty and wisdom;
If thy home should be immoral,
If thine inmates fail in virtue,
Then thy gray-beards would be black-dogs
In sheep’s clothing at thy firesides;
All thy women would be witches,
Wicked witches in thy chambers,
And thy brothers be as serpents
Crawling through thy husband’s mansion;
All thy sisters would be famous
For their evil thoughts and conduct.

“Equal honors must be given
To thy husband’s friends and kindred;
Lower must thy head be bended,
Than within thy mother’s dwelling,
Than within thy father’s guest-room,
When thou didst thy kindred honor.
Ever strive to give good counsel,
Wear a countenance of sunshine,
Bear a head upon thy shoulders
Filled with wise and ancient sayings;
Open bright thine eyes at morning
To behold the silver sunrise,
Sharpen well thine ears at evening,
Thus to hear the rooster crowing;
When he makes his second calling,
Straightway thou must rise from slumber,
Let the aged sleep in quiet;
Should the rooster fail to call thee,
Let the moonbeams touch thine eyelids,
Let the Great Bear be thy keeper;
Often go thou and consult them,
Call upon the Moon for counsel,
Ask the Bear for ancient wisdom,
From the stars divine thy future;
When the Great Bear faces southward,
When his tail is pointing northward,
This is time to break with slumber,
Seek for fire within the ashes,
Place a spark upon the tinder,
Blow the fire through all the fuel.
If no spark is in the ashes,
Then go wake thy hero-husband,
Speak these words to him on waking:
‘Give me fire, O my beloved,
Give a single spark, my husband,
Strike a little fire from flintstone,
Let it fall upon my tinder.’

“From the spark, O Bride of Beauty,
Light thy fires, and heat thine ovens,
In the holder, place the torch-light,
Find thy pathway to the stables,
There to fill the empty mangers;
If thy husband’s cows be lowing,
If thy brother’s steeds be neighing,
Then the cows await thy coming,
And the steeds for thee are calling,
Hasten, stooping through the hurdles,
Hasten through the yards and stables,
Feed thy husband’s cows with pleasure,
Feed with care the gentle lambkins,
Give the cows the best of clover,
Hay, and barley, to the horses,
Feed the calves of lowing mothers,
Feed the fowl that fly to meet thee.

“Never rest upon the haymow,
Never sleep within the hurdles,
When the kine are fed and tended,
When the flocks have all been watered;
Hasten thence, my pretty matron,
Like the snow-flakes to thy dwelling,
There a crying babe awaits thee,
Weeping in his couch neglected,
Cannot speak and tell his troubles,
Speechless babe, and weeping infant,
Cannot say that he is hungry,
Whether pain or cold distresses,
Greets with joy his mother’s footsteps.
Afterward repair in silence
To thy husband’s rooms and presence,
Early visit thou his chambers,
In thy hand a golden pitcher,
On thine arm a broom of birch-wood,
In thy teeth a lighted taper,
And thyself the fourth in order.
Sweep thou then thy hero’s dwelling,
Dust his benches and his tables,
Wash the flooring well with water.

“If the baby of thy sister
Play alone within his corner,
Show the little child attention,
Bathe his eyes and smoothe his ringlets,
Give the infant needed comforts;
Shouldst thou have no bread of barley,
In his hand adjust some trinket.

“Lastly, when the week has ended,
Give thy house a thorough cleansing,
Benches, tables, walls, and ceilings;
What of dust is on the windows,
Sweep away with broom of birch-twigs,
All thy rooms must first be sprinkled,
That the dust may not be scattered,
May not fill the halls and chambers.
Sweep the dust from every crevice,
Leave thou not a single atom;
Also sweep the chimney-corners,
Do not then forget the rafters,
Lest thy home should seem untidy,
Lest thy dwelling seem neglected.

“Hear, O maiden, what I tell thee,
Learn the tenor of my teaching:
Never dress in scanty raiment,
Let thy robes be plain and comely,
Ever wear the whitest linen,
On thy feet wear tidy fur-shoes,
For the glory of thy husband,
For the honor of thy hero.
Tend thou well the sacred sorb-tree,
Guard the mountain-ashes planted
In the court-yard, widely branching;
Beautiful the mountain-ashes,
Beautiful their leaves and flowers,
Still more beautiful the berries.
Thus the exiled one demonstrates
That she lives to please her husband,
Tries to make her hero happy.

“Like the mouse, have ears for hearing,
Like the hare, have feet for running,
Bend thy neck and turn thy visage
Like the juniper and aspen,
Thus to watch with care thy goings,
Thus to guard thy feet from stumbling,
That thou mayest walk in safety.

“When thy brother comes from plowing,
And thy father from his garners,
And thy husband from the woodlands,
From his chopping, thy beloved,
Give to each a water-basin,
Give to each a linen-towel,
Speak to each some pleasant greeting.

“When thy second mother hastens
To thy husband’s home and kindred,
In her hand a corn-meal measure,
Haste thou to the court to meet her,
Happy-hearted, bow before her,
Take the measure from her fingers,
Happy, bear it to thy husband.

“If thou shouldst not see distinctly
What demands thy next attention,
Ask at once thy hero’s mother:
‘Second mother, my beloved,
Name the task to be accomplished
By thy willing second daughter,
Tell me how to best perform it.’

“This should be the mother’s answer:
‘This the manner of thy workings,
Thus thy daily work accomplish:
Stamp with diligence and courage,
Grind with will and great endurance,
Set the millstones well in order,
Fill the barley-pans with water,
Knead with strength the dough for baking,
Place the fagots on the fire-place,
That thy ovens may be heated,
Bake in love the honey-biscuit,
Bake the larger loaves of barley,
Rinse to cleanliness thy platters,
Polish well thy drinking-vessels.

“If thou hearest from the mother,
From the mother of thy husband,
That the cask for meal is empty,
Take the barley from the garners,
Hasten to the rooms for grinding.
When thou grindest in the chambers,
Do not sing in glee and joyance,
Turn the grinding-stones in silence,
To the mill give up thy singing,
Let the side-holes furnish music;
Do not sigh as if unhappy,
Do not groan as if in trouble,
Lest the father think thee weary,
Lest thy husband’s mother fancy
That thy groans mean discontentment,
That thy sighing means displeasure.
Quickly sift the flour thou grindest,
Take it to the casks in buckets,
Bake thy hero’s bread with pleasure,
Knead the dough with care and patience,
That thy biscuits may be worthy,
That the dough be light and airy.

“Shouldst thou see a bucket empty,
Take the bucket on thy shoulder,
On thine arm a silver-dipper,
Hasten off to fill with water
From the crystal river flowing;
Gracefully thy bucket carry,
Bear it firmly by the handles,
Hasten houseward like the zephyrs,
Hasten like the air of autumn;
Do not tarry near the streamlet,
At the waters do not linger,
That the father may not fancy,
Nor the ancient dame imagine,
That thou hast beheld thine image,
Hast admired thy form and features,
Hast admired thy grace and beauty
In the mirror of the fountain,
In the crystal streamlet’s eddies.

“Shouldst thou journey to the woodlands,
There to gather aspen-fagots,
Do not go with noise and bustle,
Gather all thy sticks in silence,
Gather quietly the birch-wood,
That the father may not fancy,
And the mother not imagine,
That thy calling came from anger,
And thy noise from discontentment.

“If thou goest to the store-house
To obtain the flour of barley,
Do not tarry on thy journey,
On the threshold do not linger,
That the father may not fancy,
And the mother not imagine,
That the meal thou hast divided
With the women of the village.

“If thou goest to the river,
There to wash thy birchen platters,
There to cleanse thy pans and buckets,
Lest thy work be done in neatness,
Rinse the sides, and rinse the handles,
Rinse thy pitchers to perfection,
Spoons, and forks, and knives, and goblets,
Rinse with care thy cooking-vessels,
Closely watch the food-utensils,
That the dogs may not deface them,
That the kittens may not mar them,
That the eagles may not steal them,
That the children may not break them;
Many children in the village,
Many little heads and fingers,
That will need thy careful watching,
Lest they steal the things of value.

“When thou goest to thy bathing,
Have the brushes ready lying
In the bath-room clean and smokeless;
Do not, linger in the water,
At thy bathing do not tarry,
That the father may not fancy,
And the mother not imagine,
Thou art sleeping on the benches,
Rolling in the laps of comfort.

“From thy bath, when thou returnest,
To his bathing tempt the father,
Speak to him the words that follow:
‘Father of my hero-husband,
Clean are all the bath-room benches,
Everything in perfect order;
Go and bathe for thine enjoyment,
Pour the water all-sufficient,
I will lend thee needed service.’

“When the time has come for spinning,
When the hours arrive for weaving,
Do not ask the help of others,
Look not in the stream for knowledge,
For advice ask not the servants,
Nor the spindle from the sisters,
Nor the weaving-comb from strangers.
Thou thyself must do the spinning,
With thine own hand ply the shuttle,
Loosely wind the skeins of wool-yarn,
Tightly wind the balls of flax-thread,
Wind them deftly in the shuttle;
Fit the warp upon the rollers,
Beat the woof and warp together,
Swiftly ply the weaver’s shuttle,
Weave good cloth for all thy vestments,
Weave of woolen, webs for dresses
From the finest wool of lambkins,
One thread only in thy weaving.

“Hear thou what I now advise thee:
Brew thy beer from early barley,
From the barley’s new-grown kernels,
Brew it with the magic virtues,
Malt it with the sweets of honey,
Do not stir it with the birch-rod,
Stir it with thy skilful fingers;
When thou goest to the garners,
Do not let the seed bring evil,
Keep the dogs outside the brew-house,
Have no fear of wolves in hunger,
Nor the wild-beasts of the mountains,
When thou goest to thy brewing,
Shouldst thou wander forth at midnight.

“Should some stranger come to see thee,
Do not worry for his comfort;
Ever does the worthy household
Have provisions for the stranger,
Bits of meat, and bread, and biscuit,
Ample for the dinner-table;
Seat the stranger in thy dwelling,
Speak with him in friendly accents,
Entertain the guest with kindness,
While his dinner is preparing.
When the stranger leaves thy threshold,
When his farewell has been spoken,
Lead him only to the portals,
Do not step without the doorway,
That thy husband may not fancy,
And the mother not imagine,
Thou hast interest in strangers.

“Shouldst thou ever make a journey
To the centre of the village,
There to gain some needed object,
While thou speakest in the hamlet,
Let thy words be full of wisdom,
That thou shamest not thy kindred,
Nor disgrace thy husband’s household.

“Village-maidens oft will ask thee,
Mothers of the hamlet question:
‘Does thy husband’s mother greet thee
As in childhood thou wert greeted,
In thy happy home in Pohya?’
Do not answer in negation,
Say that she has always given
Thee the best of her provisions,
Given thee the kindest greetings,
Though it be but once a season.

“Listen well to what I tell thee:
As thou goest from thy father
To thy husband’s distant dwelling,
Thou must not forget thy mother,
Her that gave thee life and beauty,
Her that nurtured thee in childhood,
Many sleepless nights she nursed thee;
Often were her wants neglected,
Numberless the times she rocked thee;
Tender, true, and ever faithful,
Is the mother to her daughter.
She that can forget her mother,
Can neglect the one that nursed her,
Should not visit Mana’s castle,
In the kingdom of Tuoni;
In Manala she would suffer,
Suffer frightful retribution,
Should her mother be forgotten;
Should her dear one be neglected,
Mana’s daughters will torment her,
And Tuoni’s sons revile her,
They will ask her much as follows:
‘How couldst thou forget thy mother,
How neglect the one that nursed thee?
Great the pain thy mother suffered,
Great the trouble that thou gavest
When thy loving mother brought thee
Into life for good or evil,
When she gave thee earth-existence,
When she nursed thee but an infant,
When she fed thee in thy childhood,
When she taught thee what thou knowest,
Mana’s punishments upon thee,
Since thy mother is forgotten!’”

On the floor a witch was sitting,
Near the fire a beggar-woman,
One that knew the ways of people,
These the words the woman uttered:
“Thus the crow calls in the winter:
‘Would that I could be a singer,
And my voice be full of sweetness,
But, alas! my songs are worthless,
Cannot charm the weakest creature;
I must live without the singing,
Leave the songs to the musicians,
Those that live in golden houses,
In the homes of the beloved;
Homeless therefore I must wander,
Like a beggar in the corn-fields,
And with none to do me honor.’

“Hear now, sister, what I tell thee,
Enter thou thy husband’s dwelling,
Follow not his mind, nor fancies,
As my husband’s mind I followed;
As a flower was I when budding,
Sprouting like a rose in spring-time,
Growing like a slender maiden,
Like the honey-gem of glory,
Like the playmates of my childhood,
Like the goslings of my father,
Like the blue-ducks of my mother,
Like my brother’s water-younglings,
Like the bullfinch of my sister;
Grew I like the heather-flower,
Like the berry of the meadow,
Played upon the sandy sea-shore,
Rocked upon the fragrant upland,
Sang all day adown the valley,
Thrilled with song the hill and mountain,
Filled with mirth the glen and forest,
Lived and frolicked in the woodlands.

“Into traps are foxes driven
By the cruel pangs of hunger,
Into traps, the cunning ermine;
Thus are maidens wooed and wedded,
In their hunger for a husband.
Thus created is the virgin,
Thus intended is the daughter,
Subject to her hero-husband,
Subject also to his mother.

“Then to other fields I hastened,
Like a berry from the border,
Like a cranberry for roasting,
Like a strawberry for dinner;
All the elm-trees seemed to wound me,
All the aspens tried to cut me,
All the willows tried to seize me,
All the forest tried to slay me.
Thus I journeyed to my husband,
Thus I travelled to his dwelling,
Was conducted to his mother.
Then there were, as was reported,
Six compartments built of pine-wood,
Twelve the number of the chambers,
And the mansion filled with garrets,
Studding all the forest border,
Every by-way filled with flowers;
Streamlets bordered fields of barley,
Filled with wheat and corn, the islands,
Grain in plenty in the garners,
Rye unthrashed in great abundance,
Countless sums of gold and silver,
Other treasures without number.
When my journey I had ended,
When my hand at last was given,
Six supports were in his cabin,
Seven poles as rails for fencing.
Filled with anger were the bushes,
All the glens disfavor showing,
All the walks were lined with trouble,
Evil-tempered were the forests,
Hundred words of evil import,
Hundred others of unkindness.
Did not let this bring me sorrow,
Long I sought to merit praises,
Long I hoped to find some favor,
Strove most earnestly for kindness;
When they led me to the cottage,
There I tried some chips to gather,
Knocked my head against the portals
Of my husband’s lowly dwelling.

“At the door were eyes of strangers,
Sable eyes at the partition,
Green with envy in his cabin,
Evil heroes in the back-ground,
From each mouth the fire was streaming,
From each tongue the sparks out-flying,
Flying from my second father,
From his eyeballs of unkindness.
Did not let this bring me trouble,
Tried to live in peace and pleasure,
In the homestead of my husband;
In humility I suffered,
Skipped about with feet of rabbit,
Flew along with steps of ermine,
Late I laid my head to slumber,
Early rose as if a servant,
Could not win a touch of kindness,
Could not merit love nor honor,
Though I had dislodged the mountains,
Though the rocks had I torn open.

“Then I turned the heavy millstone,
Ground the flour with care and trouble,
Ground the barley-grains in patience,
That the mother might be nourished,
That her fury-throat might swallow
What might please her taste and fancy,
From her gold-enamelled platters,
From the corner of her table.

“As for me, the hapless daughter,
All my flour was from the siftings
On the table near the oven,
Ate I from the birchen ladle;
Oftentimes I brought the mosses
Gathered in the lowland meadows,
Baked them into loaves for eating;
Brought the water from the river,
Thirsty, sipped it from the dipper,
Ate of fish the worst in Northland,
Only smelts, and worthless swimmers,
Rocking in my boat of birch-bark;
Never ate I fish or biscuit
From my second mother’s fingers.

“Blades I gathered in the summers,
Twisted barley-stalks in winter,
Like the laborers of heroes,
Like the servants sold in bondage.
In the thresh-house of my husband,
Evermore to me was given
Flail the heaviest and longest,
And to me the longest lever,
On the shore the strongest beater,
And the largest rake in haying;
No one thought my burden heavy,
No one thought that I could suffer,
Though the best of heroes faltered,
And the strongest women weakened.

“Thus did I, a youthful housewife,
At the right time, all my duties,
Drenched myself in perspiration,
Hoped for better times to follow;
But I only rose to labor,
Knowing neither rest nor pleasure.
I was blamed by all the household,
With ungrateful tongues derided,
Now about my awkward manners,
Now about my reputation,
Censuring my name and station.
Words unkind were heaped upon me,
Fell like hail on me unhappy,
Like the frightful flash of lightning,
Like the heavy hail of spring-time.
I did not despair entirely,
Would have lived to labor longer
Underneath the tongue of malice,
But the old-one spoiled my temper,
Roused my deepest ire and hatred;
Then my husband grew a wild-bear,
Grew a savage wolf of Hisi.

“Only then I turned to weeping,
And reflected in my chamber,
Thought of all my former pleasures
Of the happy days of childhood,
Of my father’s joyful firesides,
Of my mother’s peaceful cottage,
Then began I thus to murmur:
‘Well thou knowest, ancient mother,
How to make thy sweet bud blossom,
How to train thy tender shootlet;
Did not know where to ingraft it,
Placed, alas! the little scion
In the very worst of places,
On an unproductive hillock,
In the hardest limb of cherry,
Where it could not grow and flourish,
There to waste its life, in weeping,
Hapless in her lasting sorrow.
Worthier had been my conduct,
In the regions that are better,
In the court-yards that are wider,
In compartments that are larger,
Living with a loving husband,
Living with a stronger hero.
Shoe of birch-bark was my suitor,
Shoe of Laplanders, my husband;
Had the body of a raven,
Voice and visage like the jackdaw,
Mouth and claws were from the black-wolf,
The remainder from the wild-bear.
Had I known that mine affianced
Was a fount of pain and evil,
To the hill-side I had wandered,
Been a pine-tree on the highway,
Been a linden on the border,
Like the black-earth made my visage,
Grown a beard of ugly bristles,
Head of loam and eyes of lightning,
For my ears the knots of birches,
For my limbs the trunks of aspens.’

“This the manner of my singing
In the hearing of my husband,
Thus I sang my cares and murmurs
Thus my hero near the portals
Heard the wail of my displeasure,
Then he hastened to my chamber;
Straightway knew I by his footsteps,
Well concluded he was angry,
Knew it by his steps implanted;
All the winds were still in slumber,
Yet his sable locks stood endwise,
Fluttered round his head in fury,
While his horrid mouth stood open;
To and fro his eyes were rolling,
In one hand a branch of willow,
In the other, club of alder;
Struck at me with might of malice,
Aimed the cudgel at my forehead.

“When the evening had descended,
When my husband thought of slumber
Took he in his hand a whip-stalk,
With a whip-lash made of deer-skin,
Was not made for any other,
Only made for me unhappy.

“When at last I begged for mercy,
When I sought a place for resting,
By his side I courted slumber,
Merciless, my husband seized me,
Struck me with his arm of envy,
Beat me with the whip of torture,
Deer-skin-lash and stalk of birch-wood.
From his couch I leaped impulsive,
In the coldest night of winter,
But the husband fleetly followed,
Caught me at the outer portals,
Grasped me by my streaming tresses,
Tore my ringlets from my forehead,
Cast in curls upon the night-winds
To the freezing winds of winter.
What the aid that I could ask for,
Who could free me from my torment?
Made I shoes of magic metals,
Made the straps of steel and copper,
Waited long without the dwelling,
Long I listened at the portals,
Hoping he would end his ravings,
Hoping he would sink to slumber,
But he did not seek for resting,
Did not wish to still his fury.
Finally the cold benumbed me;
As an outcast from his cabin,
I was forced to walk and wander,
When I, freezing, well reflected,
This the substance of my thinking:
‘I will not endure this torture,
Will not bear this thing forever,
Will not bear this cruel treatment,
Such contempt I will not suffer
In the wicked tribe of Hisi,
In this nest of evil Piru.’

“Then I said, ‘Farewell forever!’
To my husband’s home and kindred,
To my much-loved home and husband;
Started forth upon a journey
To my father’s distant hamlet,
Over swamps and over snow-fields,
Wandered over towering mountains,
Over hills and through the valleys,
To my brother’s welcome meadows,
To my sister’s home and birthplace.

“There were rustling withered pine-trees,
Finely-feathered firs were fading,
Countless ravens there were cawing,
All the jackdaws harshly singing,
This the chorus of the ravens:
‘Thou hast here a home no longer,
This is not the happy homestead
Of thy merry days of childhood.’

“Heeding not this woodland chorus,
Straight I journeyed to the dwelling
Of my childhood’s friend and brother,
Where the portals spake in concord,
And the hills and valleys answered,
This their saddened song and echo:
‘Wherefore dost thou journey hither,
Comest thou for joy or sorrow,
To thy father’s old dominions?
Here unhappiness awaits thee,
Long departed is thy father,
Dead and gone to visit Ukko,
Dead and gone thy faithful mother,
And thy brother is a stranger,
While his wife is chill and heartless!’

“Heeding not these many warnings,
Straightway to my brother’s cottage
Were my weary feet directed,
Laid my hand upon the door-latch
Of my brother’s dismal cottage,
But the latch was cold and lifeless.
When I wandered to the chamber,
When I waited at the doorway,
There I saw the heartless hostess,
But she did not give me greeting,
Did not give her hand in welcome;
Proud, alas! was I unhappy,
Did not make the first advances,
Did not offer her my friendship,
And my hand I did not proffer;
Laid my hand upon the oven,
All its former warmth departed!
On the coal I laid my fingers,
All the latent heat had left it.
On the rest-bench lay my brother,
Lay outstretched before the fire-place,
Heaps of soot upon his shoulders,
Heaps of ashes on his forehead.
Thus the brother asked the stranger,
Questioned thus his guest politely:
‘Tell me what thy name and station,
Whence thou comest o’er the waters!’
“This the answer that I gave him:
‘Hast thou then forgot thy sister,
Does my brother not remember,
Not recall his mother’s daughter?
We are children of one mother,
Of one bird were we the fledgelings,
In one nest were hatched and nurtured.’”

“Then the brother fell to weeping,
From his eyes great tear-drops flowing,
To his wife the brother whispered,
Whispered thus unto the housewife:
‘Bring thou beer to give my sister,
Quench her thirst and cheer her spirits.’

“Full of envy, brought the sister
Only water filled with evil,
Water for the infant’s eyelids,
Soap and water from the bath-room.

“To his wife the brother whispered,
Whispered thus unto the housewife:
‘Bring thou salmon for my sister,
For my sister so long absent,
Thus to still her pangs of hunger.’

“Thereupon the wife obeying,
Brought, in envy, only cabbage
That the children had been eating,
And the house-dogs had been licking,
Leavings of the black-dog’s breakfast.

“Then I left my brother’s dwelling,
Hastened to the ancient homestead,
To my mother’s home deserted;
Onward, onward did I wander,
Hastened onward by the cold-sea,
Dragged my body on in anguish,
To the cottage-doors of strangers,
To the unfamiliar portals,
For the care of the neglected,
For the needy of the village,
For the children poor and orphaned.

“There are many wicked people,
Many slanderers of women,
Many women evil-minded,
That malign their sex through envy.
Many they with lips of evil,
That belie the best of maidens,
Prove the innocent are guilty
Of the worst of misdemeanors,
Speak aloud in tones unceasing,
Speak, alas! with wicked motives,
Spread the follies of their neighbors
Through the tongues of self-pollution.
Very few, indeed, the people
That will feed the poor and hungry,
That will bid the stranger welcome;
Very few to treat her kindly,
Innocent, and lone, and needy,
Few to offer her a shelter
From the chilling storms of winter,
When her skirts with ice are stiffened,
Coats of ice her only raiment!

“Never in my days of childhood,
Never in my maiden life-time,
Never would believe the story,
Though a hundred tongues had told it,
Though a thousand voices sang it,
That such evil things could happen,
That such misery could follow,
Such misfortune could befall one
Who has tried to do her duty,
Who has tried to live uprightly,
Tried to make her people happy.”

Thus the young bride was instructed,
Beauteous Maiden of the Rainbow,
Thus by Osmotar, the teacher.




RUNE XXIV.
THE BRIDE’S FAREWELL.


Osmotar, the bride-instructor,
Gives the wedding-guests this counsel,
Speaks these measures to the bridegroom:
“Ilmarinen, artist-brother,
Best of all my hero-brothers,
Of my mother’s sons the dearest,
Gentlest, truest, bravest, grandest,
Listen well to what I tell thee
Of the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Of thy beauteous life-companion:
Bridegroom, praise thy fate hereafter,
Praise forever thy good fortune;
If thou praisest, praise sincerely,
Good the maiden thou hast wedded,
Good the bride that Ukko gives thee,
Graciously has God bestowed her.
Sound her praises to thy father,
Praise her virtues to thy mother,
Let thy heart rejoice in secret,
That thou hast the Bride of Beauty,
Lovely Maiden of the Rainbow!

“Brilliant near thee stands the maiden,
At thy shoulder thy companion,
Happy under thy protection,
Beautiful as golden moonlight,
Beautiful upon thy bosom,
Strong to do thy kindly bidding,
Labor with thee as thou wishest,
Rake the hay upon thy meadows,
Keep thy home in full perfection,
Spin for thee the finest linen,
Weave for thee the richest fabrics,
Make for thee the softest raiment,
Make thy weaver’s loom as merry
As the cuckoo of the forest;
Make the shuttle glide in beauty
Like the ermine of the woodlands;
Make the spindle twirl as deftly
As the squirrel spins the acorn;
Village-maidens will not slumber
While thy young bride’s loom is humming,
While she plies the graceful shuttle.

“Bridegroom of the Bride of Beauty,
Noblest of the Northland heroes,
Forge thyself a scythe for mowing,
Furnish it with oaken handle,
Carve it in thine ancient smithy,
Hammer it upon thine anvil,
Have it ready for the summer,
For the merry days of sunshine;
Take thy bride then to the lowlands,
Mow the grass upon thy meadows,
Rake the hay when it is ready,
Make the reeds and grasses rustle,
Toss the fragrant heads of clover,
Make thy hay in Kalevala
When the silver sun is shining.

“When the time has come for weaving,
To the loom attract the weaver,
Give to her the spools and shuttles,
Let the willing loom be worthy,
Beautiful the frame and settle;
Give to her what may be needed,
That the weaver’s song may echo,
That the lathe may swing and rattle,
May be heard within the village,
That the aged may remark it,
And the village-maidens question:
‘Who is she that now is weaving,
What new power now plies the shuttle?’
“Make this answer to the question:
‘It is my beloved weaving,
My young bride that plies the shuttle.’

“Shall the weaver’s weft be loosened,
Shall the young bride’s loom be tightened?
Do not let the weft be loosened,
Nor the weaver’s loom be tightened;
Such the weaving of the daughters
Of the Moon beyond the cloudlets;
Such the spinning of the maidens
Of the Sun in high Jumala,
Of the daughters of the Great Bear,
Of the daughters of the Evening.

“Bridegroom, thou beloved hero,
Brave descendant of thy fathers,
When thou goest on a journey,
When thou drivest on the highway,
Driving with the Rainbow-daughter,
Fairest bride of Sariola,
Do not lead her as a titmouse,
As a cuckoo of the forest,
Into unfrequented places,
Into copses of the borders,
Into brier-fields and brambles,
Into unproductive marshes;
Let her wander not, nor stumble
On opposing rocks and rubbish.
Never in her father’s dwelling,
Never in her mother’s court-yard,
Has she fallen into ditches,
Stumbled hard against the fences,
Run through brier-fields, nor brambles,
Fallen over rocks, nor rubbish.

“Magic bridegroom of Wainola,
Wise descendant of the heroes,
Never let thy young wife suffer,
Never let her be neglected,
Never let her sit in darkness,
Never leave her unattended.
Never in her father’s mansion,
In the chambers of her mother,
Has she sat alone in darkness,
Has she suffered for attention;
Sat she by the crystal window,
Sat and rocked, in peace and plenty,
Evenings for her father’s pleasure,
Mornings for her mother’s sunshine.
Never mayest thou, O bridegroom,
Lead the Maiden of the Rainbow
To the mortar filled with sea-grass,
There to grind the bark for cooking,
There to bake her bread from stubble,
There to knead her dough from tan-bark
Never in her father’s dwelling,
Never in her mother’s mansion,
Was she taken to the mortar,
There to bake her bread from sea-grass.
Thou shouldst lead the Bride of Beauty
To the garner’s rich abundance,
There to draw the till of barley,
Grind the flour and knead for baking,
There to brew the beer for drinking,
Wheaten flour for honey-biscuits.

“Hero-bridegroom of Wainola,
Never cause thy Bride of Beauty
To regret her day of marriage;
Never make her shed a tear-drop,
Never fill her cup with sorrow.
Should there ever come an evening
When thy wife shall feel unhappy,
Put the harness on thy racer,
Hitch the fleet-foot to the snow-sledge,
Take her to her father’s dwelling,
To the household of her mother;
Never in thy hero-lifetime,
Never while the moonbeams glimmer,
Give thy fair spouse evil treatment,
Never treat her as thy servant;
Do not bar her from the cellar,
Do not lock thy best provisions;
Never in her father’s mansion,
Never by her faithful mother
Was she treated as a hireling.

“Honored bridegroom of the Northland,
Proud descendant of the fathers,
If thou treatest well thy young wife,
Worthily wilt thou be treated;
When thou goest to her homestead,
When thou visitest her father,
Thou shalt meet a cordial welcome.

“Censure not the Bride of Beauty,
Never grieve thy Rainbow-maiden,
Never say in tones reproachful,
She was born in lowly station,
That her father was unworthy;
Honored are thy bride’s relations,
From an old-time tribe, her kindred;
When of corn they sowed a measure,
Each one’s portion was a kernel;
When they sowed a cask of flax-seed,
Each received a thread of linen.
Never, never, magic husband,
Treat thy beauty-bride unkindly,
Teach her not with lash of servants,
Strike her not with thongs of leather;
Never has she wept in anguish
From the birch-whip of her mother.
Stand before her like a rampart,
Be to her a strong protection,
Do not let thy mother chide her,
Let thy father not upbraid her,
Never let thy guests offend her;
Should thy servants bring annoyance,
They may need the master’s censure;
Do not harm the Bride of Beauty,
Never injure her thou lovest;
Three long years hast thou been wooing,
Hoping every mouth to win her.

“Counsel with the bride of heaven,
To thy young wife give instruction,
Kindly teach thy bride in secret,
In the long and dreary evenings,
When thou sittest at the fireside;
Teach one year, in words of kindness,
Teach with eyes of love a second,
In the third year teach with firmness.
If she should not heed thy teaching,
Should not hear thy kindly counsel
After three long years of effort,
Cut a reed upon the lowlands,
Cut a nettle from the border,
Teach thy wife with harder measures.
In the fourth year, if she heed not,
Threaten her with sterner treatment,
With the stalks of rougher edges,
Use not yet the thongs of leather,
Do not touch her with the birch-whip.
If she does not heed this warning,
Should she pay thee no attention,
Cut a rod upon the mountains,
Or a willow in the valleys,
Hide it underneath thy mantle,
That the stranger may not see it,
Show it to thy wife in secret,
Shame her thus to do her duty,
Strike not yet, though disobeying.
Should she disregard this warning,
Still refuse to heed thy wishes,
Then instruct her with the willow,
Use the birch-rod from the mountains
In the closet of thy dwelling,
In the attic of thy mansion;
Strike, her not upon the common,
Do not conquer her in public,
Lest the villagers should see thee,
Lest the neighbors hear her weeping,
And the forests learn thy troubles.
Touch thy wife upon the shoulders,
Let her stiffened back be softened.
Do not touch her on the forehead,
Nor upon the ears, nor visage;
If a ridge be on her forehead,
Or a blue mark on her eyelids,
Then her mother would perceive it,
And her father would take notice,
All the village-workmen see it,
And the village-women ask her
‘Hast thou been in heat of battle,
Hast thou struggled in a conflict,
Or perchance the wolves have torn thee,
Or the forest-bears embraced thee,
Or the black-wolf be thy husband,
And the bear be thy protector?’”

By the fire-place lay a gray-beard,
On the hearth-stone lay a beggar,
And the old man spake as follows:
“Never, never, hero-husband,
Follow thou thy young wife’s wishes,
Follow not her inclinations,
As, alas! I did, regretful;
Bought my bride the bread of barley,
Veal, and beer, and best of butter,
Fish and fowl of all descriptions,
Beer I bought, home-brewed and sparkling,
Wheat from all the distant nations,
All the dainties of the Northland;
All of this was unavailing,
Gave my wife no satisfaction,
Often came she to my chamber,
Tore my sable locks in frenzy,
With a visage fierce and frightful,
With her eyeballs flashing anger,
Scolding on and scolding ever,
Ever speaking words of evil,
Using epithets the vilest,
Thought me but a block for chopping.
Then I sought for other measures,
Used on her my last resources,
Cut a birch-whip in the forest,
And she spake in tones endearing;
Cut a juniper or willow,
And she called me ‘hero-darling’;
When with lash my wife I threatened,
Hung she on my neck with kisses.”

Thus the bridegroom was instructed,
Thus the last advices given.

Then the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Beauteous bride of Ilmarinen,
Sighing heavily and moaning,
Fell to weeping, heavy-hearted,
Spake these words from depths of sorrow:
“Near, indeed, the separation,
Near, alas! the time for parting,
Near the time for my departure;
O the anguish of the parting,
O the pain of separation,
From these walls renowned and ancient,
From this village of the Northland,
From these scenes of peace and plenty,
Where my faithful mother taught me,
Where my father gave instruction
To me in my happy childhood,
When my years were few and tender!
As a child I did not fancy,
Never thought of separation
From the confines of this cottage,
From these dear old hills and mountains,
But, alas! I now must journey,
Since I now cannot escape it;
Empty is the bowl of parting,
All the farewell-beer is taken,
And my husband’s sledge is waiting,
With the break-board looking southward,
Looking from my father’s dwelling.

“How shall I give compensation,
How repay, on my departure,
All the kindness of my mother,
All the counsel of my father,
All the friendship of my brother,
All my sister’s warm affection?
Gratitude to thee, dear father,
For my former-life and blessings,
For the comforts of thy table,
For the pleasures of my childhood!
Gratitude to thee, dear mother,
For thy tender care and guidance,
For my birth and for my culture,
Nurtured by thy purest life-blood!
Gratitude to thee, dear brother,
Gratitude to thee, sweet sister,
To the servants of my childhood,
To my many friends and playmates!

“Never, never, aged father,
Never, thou, beloved mother,
Never, ye, my kindred spirits,
Never harbor care, nor sorrow,
Never fall to bitter weeping,
Since thy child has gone to others,
To the distant home of strangers,
To the meadows of Wainola,
From her father’s fields and firesides.
Shines the Sun of the Creator,
Shines the golden Moon of Ukko,
Glitter all the stars of heaven,
In the firmament of ether,
Full as bright on other homesteads;
Not upon my father’s uplands,
Not upon my home in childhood,
Shines the Star of Joyance only.

“Now the time has come for parting
From my father’s golden firesides,
From my brother’s welcome hearth-stone,
From the chambers of my sister,
From my mother’s happy dwelling;
Now I leave the swamps and lowlands,
Leave the grassy vales and mountains,
Leave the crystal lakes and rivers,
Leave the shores and sandy shallows,
Leave the white-capped surging billows,
Where the maidens swim and linger,
Where the mermaids sing and frolic;
Leave the swamps to those that wander,
Leave the corn-fields to the plowman,
Leave the forests to the weary,
Leave the heather to the rover,
Leave the copses to the stranger,
Leave the alleys to the beggar,
Leave the court-yards to the rambler,
Leave the portals to the servant,
Leave the matting to the sweeper,
Leave the highways to the roebuck,
Leave the woodland-glens to lynxes,
Leave the lowlands to the wild-geese,
And the birch-tree to the cuckoo.
Now I leave these friends of childhood,
Journey southward with my husband,
To the arms of Night and Winter,
O’er the ice-grown seas of Northland.

“Should I once again, returning,
Pay a visit to my tribe-folk,
Mother would not hear me calling,
Father would not see me weeping,
Calling at my mother’s grave-stone,
Weeping o’er my buried father,
On their graves the fragrant flowers,
Junipers and mournful willows,
Verdure from my mother’s tresses,
From the gray-beard of my father.

“Should I visit Sariola,
Visit once again these borders,
No one here would bid me welcome.
Nothing in these hills would greet me,
Save perchance a few things only,
By the fence a clump of osiers,
And a land-mark at the corner,
Which in early youth I planted,
When a child of little stature.

“Mother’s kine perhaps will know me,
Which so often I have watered,
Which I oft have fed and tended,
Lowing now at my departure,
In the pasture cold and cheerless;
Sure my mother’s kine will welcome
Northland’s daughter home returning.
Father’s steeds may not forget me,
Steeds that I have often ridden,
When a maiden free and happy,
Neighing now for me departing,
In the pasture of my brother,
In the stable of my father;
Sure my father’s steeds will know me,
Bid Pohyola’s daughter welcome.
Brother’s faithful dogs may know me,
That I oft have fed and petted,
Dogs that I have taught to frolic,
That now mourn for me departing,
In their kennels in the court-yard,
In their kennels cold and cheerless;
Sure my brother’s dogs will welcome
Pohya’s daughter home returning.
But the people will not know me,
When I come these scenes to visit,
Though the fords remain as ever,
Though unchanged remain the rivers,
Though untouched the flaxen fish-nets
On the shores await my coming.

“Fare thou well, my dear old homestead,
Fare ye well, my native bowers;
It would give me joy unceasing
Could I linger here forever.
Now farewell, ye halls and portals,
Leading to my father’s mansion;
It would give me joy unceasing
Could I linger here forever.
Fare ye well, familiar gardens
Filled with trees and fragrant flowers;
It would give me joy unceasing,
Could I linger here forever.
Send to all my farewell greetings,
To the fields, and groves, and berries;
Greet the meadows with their daisies,
Greet the borders with their fences,
Greet the lakelets with their islands,
Greet the streams with trout disporting,
Greet the hills with stately pine-trees,
And the valleys with their birches.
Fare ye well, ye streams and lakelets,
Fertile fields, and shores of ocean,
All ye aspens on the mountains,
All ye lindens of the valleys,
All ye beautiful stone-lindens,
All ye shade-trees by the cottage,
All ye junipers and willows,
All ye shrubs with berries laden,
Waving grass and fields of barley,
Arms of elms, and oaks, and alders,
Fare ye well, dear scenes of childhood,
Happiness of days departed!”

Ending thus, Pohyola’s daughter
Left her native fields and fallows,
Left the darksome Sariola,
With her husband, Ilmarinen,
Famous son of Kalevala.

But the youth remained for singing,
This the chorus of the children:
“Hither came a bird of evil,
Flew in fleetness from the forest,
Came to steal away our virgin,
Came to win the Maid of Beauty;
Took away our fairest flower,
Took our mermaid from the waters,
Won her with his youth and beauty,
With his keys of ancient wisdom.
Who will lead us to the sea-beach,
Who conduct us to the rivers?
Now the buckets will be idle,
On the hooks will rest the fish-poles,
Now unswept will lie the matting,
And unswept the halls of birch-wood,
Copper goblets be unburnished,
Dark the handles of the pitchers,
Fare thou well, dear Rainbow Maiden.”

Ilmarinen, happy bridegroom,
Hastened homeward with the daughter
Of the hostess of Pohyola,
With the beauty of the Northland;
Fleetly flew the hero’s snow-sledge,
Loudly creaked, and roared, and rattled
Down the banks of Northland waters,
By the side of Honey-inlet,
On the back of Sandy Mountain.
Stones went rolling from the highway,
Like the winds the sledge flew onward,
On the yoke rang hoops of iron,
Loud the spotted wood resounded,
Loudly creaked the bands of willow,
All the birchen cross-bars trembled,
And the copper-bells rang music,
In the racing of the fleet-foot,
In the courser’s gallop homeward;
Journeyed one day, then a second,
Journeyed still the third day onward,
In one hand the reins of magic,
While the other grasped the maiden,
One foot resting on the cross-bar,
And the other in the fur-robes.
Merrily the steed flew homeward,
Quickly did the highways shorten,
Till at last upon the third day,
As the sun was fast declining,
There appeared the blacksmith’s furnace,
Nearer, Ilmarinen’s dwelling,
Smoke arising high in ether,
Clouds of smoke to lofty heaven,
From the village of Wainola,
From the suitor’s forge and smithy,
From the chimneys of the hero,
From the home of the successful.




BOOK II




RUNE XXV.
WAINAMOINEN’S WEDDING-SONGS.


At the home of Ilmarinen
Long had they been watching, waiting,
For the coming of the blacksmith,
With his bride from Sariola.
Weary were the eyes of watchers,
Waiting from the father’s portals,
Looking from the mother’s windows;
Weary were the young knees standing
At the gates of the magician;
Weary grew the feet of children,
Tramping to the walls and watching;
Worn and torn, the shoes of heroes,
Running on the shore to meet him.

Now at last upon a morning
Of a lovely day in winter,
Heard they from the woods the rumble
Of a snow-sledge swiftly bounding.
Lakko, hostess of Wainola,
She the lovely Kalew-daughter,
Spake these words in great excitement:
“’Tis the sledge of the magician,
Comes at last the metal-worker
From the dismal Sariola,
By his side the Bride of Beauty!
Welcome, welcome, to this hamlet,
Welcome to thy mother’s hearth-stone,
To the dwelling of thy father,
By thine ancestors erected!”

Straightway came great Ilmarinen
To his cottage drove the blacksmith,
To the fireside of his father,
To his mother’s ancient dwelling.
Hazel-birds were sweetly singing
On the newly-bended collar;
Sweetly called the sacred cuckoos
From the summit of the break-board;
Merry, jumped the graceful squirrel
On the oaken shafts and cross-bar.

Lakko, Kalew’s fairest hostess,
Beauteous daughter of Wainola,
Spake these words of hearty welcome:
“For the new moon hopes the village,
For the sun, the happy maidens,
For the boat, the swelling water;
I have not the moon expected,
For the sun have not been waiting,
I have waited for my hero,
Waited for the Bride of Beauty;
Watched at morning, watched at evening,
Did not know but some misfortune,
Some sad fate had overtaken
Bride and bridegroom on their journey;
Thought the maiden growing weary,
Weary of my son’s attentions,
Since he faithfully had promised
To return to Kalevala,
Ere his foot-prints had departed
From the snow-fields of his father.
Every morn I looked and listened,
Constantly I thought and wondered
When his sledge would rumble homeward,
When it would return triumphant
To his home, renowned and ancient.
Had a blind and beggared straw-horse
Hobbled to these shores awaiting,
With a sledge of but two pieces,
Well the steed would have been lauded,
Had it brought my son beloved,
Had it brought the Bride of Beauty.
Thus I waited long, impatient,
Looking out from morn till even,
Watching with my head extended,
With my tresses streaming southward,
With my eyelids widely opened,
Waiting for my son’s returning
To this modest home of heroes,
To this narrow place of resting.
Finally am I rewarded,
For the sledge has come triumphant,
Bringing home my son and hero,
By his side the Rainbow maiden,
Red her cheeks, her visage winsome,
Pride and joy of Sariola.

“Wizard-bridegroom of Wainola,
Take thy courser to the stable,
Lead him to the well-filled manger,
To the best of grain and clover;
Give to us thy friendly greetings,
Greetings send to all thy people.
When thy greetings thou hast ended,
Then relate what has befallen
To our hero in his absence.
Hast thou gone without adventure
To the dark fields of Pohyola,
Searching for the Maid of Beauty?
Didst thou scale the hostile ramparts,
Didst thou take the virgin’s mansion,
Passing o’er her mother’s threshold,
Visiting the halls of Louhi?

“But I know without the asking,
See the answer to my question:
Comest from the North a victor,
On thy journey well contented;
Thou hast brought the Northland daughter,
Thou hast razed the hostile portals,
Thou hast stormed the forts of Louhi,
Stormed the mighty walls opposing,
On thy journey to Pohyola,
To the village of the father.
In thy care the bride is sitting,
In thine arms, the Rainbow-maiden,
At thy side, the pride of Northland,
Mated to the highly-gifted.
Who has told the cruel story,
Who the worst of news has scattered,
That thy suit was unsuccessful,
That in vain thy steed had journeyed?
Not in vain has been thy wooing,
Not in vain thy steed has travelled
To the dismal homes of Lapland;
He has journeyed heavy laden,
Shaken mane, and tail, and forelock,
Dripping foam from lips and nostrils,
Through the bringing of the maiden,
With the burden of the husband.

“Come, thou beauty, from the snow-sledge,
Come, descend thou from the cross-bench,
Do not linger for assistance,
Do not tarry to be carried;
If too young the one that lifts thee,
If too proud the one in waiting,
Rise thou, graceful, like a young bird,
Hither glide along the pathway,
On the tan-bark scarlet-colored,
That the herds of kine have evened,
That the gentle lambs have trodden,
Smoothened by the tails of horses.
Haste thou here with gentle footsteps,
Through the pathway smooth and tidy,
On the tiles of even surface,
On thy second father’s court-yard,
To thy second mother’s dwelling,
To thy brother’s place of resting,
To thy sister’s silent chambers.
Place thy foot within these portals,
Step across this waiting threshold,
Enter thou these halls of joyance,
Underneath these painted rafters,
Underneath this roof of ages.
During all the winter evenings,
Through the summer gone forever,
Sang the tiling made of ivory,
Wishing thou wouldst walk upon it;
Often sang the golden ceiling,
Hoping thou wouldst walk beneath it,
And the windows often whistled,
Asking thee to sit beside them;
Even on this merry morning,
Even on the recent evening,
Sat the aged at their windows,
On the sea-shore ran the children,
Near the walls the maidens waited,
Ran the boys upon the highway,
There to watch the young bride’s coming,
Coming with her hero-husband.

“Hail, ye courtiers of Wainola,
With the heroes of the fathers,
Hail to thee, Wainola’s hamlet,
Hail, ye halls with heroes peopled,
Hail, ye rooms with all your inmates,
Hail to thee, sweet golden moonlight,
Hail to thee, benignant Ukko,
Hail companions of the bridegroom!
Never has there been in Northland
Such a wedding-train of honor,
Never such a bride of beauty.

“Bridegroom, thou beloved hero,
Now untie the scarlet ribbons,
And remove the silken muffler,
Let us see the honey-maiden,
See the Daughter of the Rainbow.
Seven years hast thou been wooing,
Hast thou brought the maid affianced,
Hast thou sought a sweeter cuckoo,
Sought one fairer than the moonlight,
Sought a mermaid from the ocean?
But I know without the asking,
See the answer to my question:
Thou hast brought the sweet-voiced cuckoo,
Thou hast found the swan of beauty,
Plucked the sweetest flower of Northland,
Culled the fairest of the jewels,
Gathered Pohya’s sweetest berry!”

Sat a babe upon the matting,
And the young child spake as follows:
“Brother, what is this thou bringest,
Aspen-log or trunk of willow,
Slender as the mountain-linden?
Bridegroom, well dost thou remember,
Thou hast hoped it all thy life-time,
Hoped to bring the Maid of Beauty,
Thou a thousand times hast said it,
Better far than any other,
Not one like the croaking raven,
Nor the magpie from the border,
Nor the scarecrow from the corn-fields,
Nor the vulture from the desert.
What has this one done of credit,
In the summer that has ended?
Where the gloves that she has knitted,
Where the mittens she has woven?
Thou hast brought her empty-handed,
Not a gift she brings thy father;
In thy chests the mice are nesting,
Long-tails feeding on thy vestments,
And thy bride cannot repair them.”

Lakko, hostess of Wainola,
She the faithful Kalew-daughter,
Hears the young child’s speech in wonder,
Speaks these words of disapproval:
“Silly prattler, cease thy talking,
Thou hast spoken in dishonor;
Let all others be astonished,
Heap thy malice on thy kindred,
must not harm the Bride of Beauty,
Rainbow-daughter of the Northland.
False indeed is this thy prattle,
All thy words are full of evil,
Fallen from thy tongue of mischief,
From the lips of one unworthy.
Excellent the hero’s young bride,
Best of all in Sariola,
Like the strawberry in summer,
Like the daisy from the meadow,
Like the cuckoo from the forest,
Like the bluebird from the aspen,
Like the redbreast from the heather,
Like the martin from the linden;
Never couldst thou find in Ehstland
Such a virgin as this daughter,
Such a graceful beauteous maiden,
With such dignity of carriage,
With such arms of pearly whiteness,
With a neck so fair and lovely.
Neither is she empty-handed,
She has brought us furs abundant,
Brought us many silken garments,
Richest weavings of Pohyola.
Many beauteous things the maiden,
With the spindle has accomplished,
Spun and woven with her fingers;
Dresses of the finest texture
She in winter has upfolded,
Bleached them in the days of spring-time,
Dried them at the hour of noon-day,
For our couches finest linen,
For our heads the softest pillows,
For our comfort woollen blankets,
For our necks the silken ribbons.”
To the bride speaks gracious Lakko:
“Goodly wife, thou Maid of Beauty,
Highly wert thou praised as daughter,
In thy father’s distant country;
Here thou shalt be praised forever
By the kindred of thy husband;
Thou shalt never suffer sorrow,
Never give thy heart to grieving;
In the swamps thou wert not nurtured,
Wert not fed beside the brooklets;
Thou wert born ’neath stars auspicious,
Nurtured from the richest garners,
Thou wert taken to the brewing
Of the sweetest beer in Northland.

“Beauteous bride from Sariola,
Shouldst thou see me bringing hither
Casks of corn, or wheat, or barley,
Bringing rye in great abundance,
They belong to this thy household;
Good the plowing of thy husband,
Good his sowing and his reaping.

“Bride of Beauty from the Northland,
Thou wilt learn this home to manage,
Learn to labor with thy kindred;
Good the home for thee to dwell in,
Good enough for bride and daughter.
At thy hand will rest the milk-pail,
And the churn awaits thine order;
It is well here for the maiden,
Happy will the young bride labor,
Easy are the resting-benches;
Here the host is like thy father,
Like thy mother is the hostess,
All the sons are like thy brothers,
Like thy sisters are the daughters.

“Shouldst thou ever have a longing
For the whiting of the ocean,
For thy father’s Northland salmon,
For thy brother’s hazel-chickens,
Ask them only of thy husband,
Let thy hero-husband bring them.
There is not in all of Northland,
Not a creature of the forest,
Not a bird beneath the ether,
Not a fish within the waters,
Not the largest, nor the smallest,
That thy husband cannot capture.
It is well here for the maiden,
Here the bride may live in freedom,
Need not turn the heavy millstone,
Need not move the iron pestle;
Here the wheat is ground by water,
For the rye, the swifter current,
While the billows wash the vessels
And the surging waters rinse them.
Thou hast here a lovely village,
Finest spot in all of Northland,
In the lowlands sweet the verdure,
In the uplands, fields of beauty,
With the lake-shore near the hamlet,
Near thy home the running water,
Where the goslings swim and frolic,
Water-birds disport in numbers.”

Thereupon the bride and bridegroom
Were refreshed with richest viands,
Given food and drink abundant,
Fed on choicest bits of reindeer,
On the sweetest loaves of barley,
On the best of wheaten biscuits,
On the richest beer of Northland.
Many things were on the table,
Many dainties of Wainola,
In the bowls of scarlet color,
In the platters deftly painted,
Many cakes with honey sweetened,
To each guest was butter given,
Many bits of trout and whiting,
Larger salmon carved in slices,
With the knives of molten silver,
Rimmed with gold the silver handles,
Beer of barley ceaseless flowing,
Honey-drink that was not purchased,
In the cellar flows profusely,
Beer for all, the tongues to quicken,
Mead and beer the minds to freshen.
Who is there to lead the singing,
Lead the songs of Kalevala?

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
The eternal, wise enchanter,
Quick begins his incantations,
Straightway sings the songs that follow.
“Golden brethren, dearest kindred,
Ye, my loved ones, wise and worthy
Ye companions, highly-gifted,
Listen to my simple sayings:
Rarely stand the geese together,
Sisters do not mate each other,
Not together stand the brothers,
Nor the children of one mother,
In the countries of the Northland.

“Shall we now begin the singing,
Sing the songs of old tradition?
Singers can but sing their wisdom,
And the cuckoo call the spring-time,
And the goddess of the heavens
Only dyes the earth in beauty;
So the goddesses of weaving
Can but weave from dawn till twilight,
Ever sing the youth of Lapland
In their straw-shoes full of gladness,
When the coarse-meat of the roebuck,
Or of blue-moose they have eaten.
Wherefore should I not be singing,
And the children not be chanting
Of the biscuits of Wainola,
Of the bread of Kalew-waters?
Even sing the lads of Lapland
In their straw-shoes filled with joyance,
Drinking but a cup of water,
Eating but the bitter tan-bark.
Wherefore should I not be singing,
And the children not be chanting
Of the beer of Kalevala,
Brewed from barley in perfection,
Dressed in quaint and homely costume,
As they sit beside their hearth-stones.
Wherefore should I not be singing,
And the children too be chanting
Underneath these painted rafters,
In these halls renowned and ancient?
This the place for men to linger,
This the court-room for the maidens,
Near the foaming beer of barley,
Honey-brewed in great abundance,
Very near, the salmon-waters,
Near, the nets for trout and whiting,
Here where food is never wanting,
Where the beer is ever brewing.
Here Wainola’s sons assemble,
Here Wainola’s daughters gather,
Here they never eat in trouble,
Here they live without regretting,
In the life-time of the landlord,
While the hostess lives and prospers.

“Who shall first be sung and lauded?
Shall it be the bride or bridegroom?
Let us praise the bridegroom’s father,
Let the hero-host be chanted,
Him whose home is in the forest,
Him who built upon the mountains,
Him who brought the trunks of lindens,
With their tops and slender branches,
Brought them to the best of places,
Joined them skilfully together,
For the mansion of the nation,
For this famous hero-dwelling,
Walls procured upon the lowlands,
Rafters from the pine and fir-tree,
From the woodlands beams of oak-wood,
From the berry-plains the studding,
Bark was furnished by the aspen,
And the mosses from the fenlands.
Trimly builded is this mansion,
In a haven warmly sheltered;
Here a hundred men have labored,
On the roof have stood a thousand,
As this spacious house was building,
As this roof was tightly jointed.
Here the ancient mansion-builder,
When these rafters were erected,
Lost in storms his locks of sable,
Scattered by the winds of heaven.
Often has the hero-landlord
On the rocks his gloves forgotten,
Left his hat upon the willows,
Lost his mittens in the marshes;
Oftentimes the mansion-builder,
In the early hours of morning,
Ere his workmen had awakened,
Unperceived by all the village,
Has arisen from his slumber,
Left his cabin the snow-fields,
Combed his locks among the branches,
Bathed his eyes in dews of morning.

“Thus obtained the pleasant landlord
Friends to fill his spacious dwelling,
Fill his benches with magicians,
Fill his windows with enchanters,
Fill his halls with wizard-singers,
Fill his floors with ancient speakers,
Fill his ancient court with strangers,
Fill his hurdles with the needy;
Thus the Kalew-host is lauded.

“Now I praise the genial hostess,
Who prepares the toothsome dinner,
Fills with plenty all her tables,
Bakes the honeyed loaves of barley,
Kneads the dough with magic fingers,
With her arms of strength and beauty,
Bakes her bread in copper ovens,
Feeds her guests and bids them welcome,
Feeds them on the toothsome bacon,
On the trout, and pike, and whiting,
On the rarest fish in ocean,
On the dainties of Wainola.

“Often has the faithful hostess
Risen from her couch in silence,
Ere the crowing of the watcher,
To prepare the wedding-banquet,
Make her tables look attractive,
Brew the honey-beer of wedlock.
Excellently has the housewife,
Has the hostess filled with wisdom,
Brewed the beer from hops and barley,
From the corn of Kalevala,
From the wheat-malt honey-seasoned,
Stirred the beer with graceful fingers,
At the oven in the penthouse,
In the chamber swept and polished.
Neither did the prudent hostess,
Beautiful, and full of wisdom,
Let the barley sprout too freely,
Lest the beer should taste of black-earth,
Be too bitter in the brewing;
Often went she to the garners,
Went alone at hour of midnight,
Was not frightened by the black-wolf,
Did not fear the beasts of woodlands.

“Now the hostess I have lauded,
Let me praise the favored suitor,
Now the honored hero-bridegroom,
Best of all the village-masters.
Clothed in purple is the hero,
Raiment brought from distant nations,
Tightly fitting to his body;
Snugly sets his coat of ermine,
To the floor it hangs in beauty,
Trailing from his neck and shoulders,
Little of his vest appearing,
Peeping through his outer raiment,
Woven by the Moon’s fair daughters,
And his vestment silver-tinselled.
Dressed in neatness is the suitor,
Round his waist a belt of copper,
Hammered by the Sun’s sweet maidens,
Ere the early fires were lighted,
Ere the fire had been discovered.
Dressed in richness is the bridegroom,
On his feet are silken stockings,
Silken ribbons on his ankles,
Gold and silver interwoven.
Dressed in beauty is the bridegroom,
On his feet are shoes of deer-skin,
Like the swans upon the water,
Like the blue-duck on the sea-waves,
Like the thrush among the willows,
Like the water-birds of Northland.
Well adorned the hero-suitor,
With his locks of golden color,
With his gold-beard finely braided,
Hero-hat upon his forehead,
Piercing through the forest branches,
Reaching to the clouds of heaven,
Bought with countless gold and silver,
Priceless is the suitor’s head-gear.

“Now the bridegroom has been lauded,
I will praise the young bride’s playmate,
Day-companion in her childhood,
In the maiden’s magic mansion.
Whence was brought the merry maiden,
From the village of Tanikka?
Thence was never brought the playmate,
Playmate of the bride in childhood.
Has she come from distant nations,
From the waters of the Dwina,
O’er the ocean far-outstretching?
Not from Dwina came the maiden,
Did not sail across the waters;
Grew as berry in the mountains,
As a strawberry of sweetness,
On the fields the child of beauty,
In the glens the golden flower.
Thence has come the young bride’s playmate,
Thence arose her fair companion.
Tiny are her feet and fingers,
Small her lips of scarlet color,
Like the maiden’s loom of Suomi;
Eyes that shine in kindly beauty
Like the twinkling stars of heaven;
Beam the playmate’s throbbing temples
Like the moonlight on the waters.
Trinkets has the bride’s companion,
On her neck a golden necklace,
In her tresses, silken ribbons,
On her arms are golden bracelets,
Golden rings upon her fingers,
Pearls are set in golden ear-rings,
Loops of gold upon her temples,
And with pearls her brow is studded.
Northland thought the Moon was shining
When her jeweled ear-rings glistened;
Thought the Sun had left his station
When her girdle shone in beauty;
Thought a ship was homeward sailing
When her colored head-gear fluttered.
Thus is praised the bride’s companion,
Playmate of the Rainbow-maiden.

“Now I praise the friends assembled,
All appear in graceful manners;
If the old are wise and silent,
All the youth are free and merry,
All the guests are fair and worthy.
Never was there in Wainola,
Never will there be in Northland,
Such a company assembled;
All the children speak in joyance,
All the aged move sedately;
Dressed in white are all the maidens,
Like the hoar-frost of the morning,
Like the welcome dawn of spring-time,
Like the rising of the daylight.
Silver then was more abundant,
Gold among the guests in plenty,
On the hills were money-pockets,
Money-bags along the valleys,
For the friends that were invited,
For the guests in joy assembled.
All the friends have now been lauded,
Each has gained his meed of honor.”

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Song-deliverer of Northland,
Swung himself upon the fur-bench
Of his magic sledge of copper,
Straightway hastened to his hamlet,
Singing as he journeyed onward,
Singing charms and incantations,
Singing one day, then a second,
All the third day chanting legends.
On the rocks the runners rattled,
Hung the sledge upon a birch-stump,
Broke it into many pieces,
With the magic of his singing;
Double were the runners bended,
All the parts were torn asunder,
And his magic sledge was ruined.

Then the good, old Wainamoinen
Spake these words in meditation:
“Is there one among this number,
In this rising generation,
Or perchance among the aged,
In the passing generation,
That will go to Mana’s kingdom,
To the empire of Tuoni,
There to get the magic auger
From the master of Manala,
That I may repair my snow-sledge,
Or a second sledge may fashion?”

What the younger people answered
Was the answer of the aged:
“Not among the youth of Northland,
Nor among the aged heroes,
Is there one of ample courage,
That has bravery sufficient,
To attempt the reckless journey
To the kingdom of Tuoni,
To Manala’s fields and castles,
Thence to bring Tuoni’s auger,
Wherewithal to mend thy snow-sledge,
Build anew thy sledge of magic.”

Thereupon old Wainamoinen,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
Went again to Mana’s empire,
To the kingdom of Tuoni,
Crossed the sable stream of Deathland,
To the castles of Manala,
Found the auger of Tuoni,
Brought the instrument in safety.
Straightway sings old Wainamoinen,
Sings to life a purple forest,
In the forest, slender birches,
And beside them, mighty oak-trees,
Shapes them into shafts and runners,
Moulds them by his will and power,
Makes anew his sledge of magic.

On his steed he lays the harness,
Binds him to his sledge securely,
Seats himself upon the cross-bench,
And the racer gallops homeward,
To the manger filled and waiting,
To the stable of his master;
Brings the ancient Wainamoinen,
Famous bard and wise enchanter,
To the threshold of his dwelling,
To his home in Kalevala.




RUNE XXVI.
ORIGIN OF THE SERPENT.


Ahti, living on the island,
Near the Kauko-point and harbor,
Plowed his fields for rye and barley,
Furrowed his extensive pastures,
Heard with quickened ears an uproar,
Heard the village in commotion,
Heard a noise along the sea-shore,
Heard the foot-steps on the ice-plain,
Heard the rattle of the sledges;
Quick his mind divined the reason,
Knew it was Pohyola’s wedding,
Wedding of the Rainbow-virgin.
Quick he stopped in disappointment,
Shook his sable locks in envy,
Turned his hero-head in anger,
While the scarlet blood ceased flowing
Through his pallid face and temples;
Ceased his plowing and his sowing,
On the field he left the furrows;
On his steed he lightly mounted,
Straightway galloped fleetly homeward
To his well-beloved mother,
To his mother old and golden,
Gave his mother these directions,
These the words of Lemminkainen:
“My beloved, faithful mother,
Quickly bring me beer and viands,
Bring me food for I am hungry,
Food and drink for me abundant,
Have my bath-room quickly heated,
Quickly set the room in order,
That I may refresh my body,
Dress myself in hero-raiment.”

Lemminkainen’s aged mother
Brings her hero food in plenty,
Beer and viands for the hungry,
For her thirsting son and hero;
Quick she heats the ancient bath-room,
Quickly sets his bath in order.

Then the reckless Lemminkainen
Ate his meat with beer inspiring,
Hastened to his bath awaiting;
Only was the bullfinch bathing,
With the many-colored bunting;
Quick the hero laved his temples,
Laved himself to flaxen whiteness,
Quick returning to his mother,
Spake in haste the words that follow:
“My beloved, helpful mother,
Go at once to yonder mountain,
To the store-house on the hill-top,
Bring my vest of finest texture,
Bring my hero-coat of purple,
Bring my suit of magic colors,
Thus to make me look attractive,
Thus to robe myself in beauty.”

First the ancient mother asked him,
Asked her son this simple question:
“Whither dost thou go, my hero?
Dost thou go to hunt the roebuck,
Chase the lynx upon the mountains,
Shoot the squirrel in the woodlands?”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
Also known as Kaukomieli:
“Worthy mother of my being,
Go I not to hunt the roebuck,
Chase the lynx upon the mountains,
Shoot the squirrel on the tree-tops;
I am going to Pohyola,
To the feasting of her people.
Bring at once my purple vestments,
Straightway bring my nuptial outfit,
Let me don it for the marriage
Of the maiden of the Northland.”

But the ancient dame dissented,
And the wife forebade the husband;
Two of all the best of heroes,
Three of nature’s fairest daughters,
Strongly urged wild Lemminkainen
Not to go to Sariola,
To Pohyola’s great carousal,
To the marriage-feast of Northland,
“Since thou hast not been invited,
Since they do not wish thy presence.”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen.
These the words of Kaukomieli:
“Where the wicked are invited,
There the good are always welcome,
Herein lies my invitation;
I am constantly reminded
By this sword of sharpened edges,
By this magic blade and scabbard,
That Pohyola needs my presence.”

Lemminkainen’s aged mother
Sought again to stay her hero:
“Do not go, my son beloved,
To the feasting in Pohyola;
Full of horrors are the highways,
On the road are many wonders,
Three times Death appears to frighten,
Thrice destruction hovers over!”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
These the words of Kaukomieli:
“Death is seen by aged people,
Everywhere they see perdition,
Death can never frighten heroes,
Heroes do not fear the spectre;
Be that as it may, dear mother,
Tell that I may understand thee,
Name the first of all destructions,
Name the first and last destroyers!”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“I will tell thee, son and hero,
Not because I wish to speak it,
But because the truth is worthy;
I will name the chief destruction,
Name the first of the destroyers.
When thou hast a distance journeyed,
Only one day hast thou travelled,
Comes a stream along the highway,
Stream of fire of wondrous beauty,
In the stream a mighty fire-spout,
In the spout a rock uprising,
On the rock a fiery hillock,
On the top a flaming eagle,
And his crooked beak he sharpens,
Sharpens too his bloody talons,
For the coming of the stranger,
For the people that approach him.”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:
“Women die beneath the eagle,
Such is not the death of heroes;
Know I well a magic lotion,
That will heal the wounds of eagles;
Make myself a steed of alders,
That will walk as my companion,
That will stride ahead majestic;
As a duck I’ll drive behind him,
Drive him o’er the fatal waters,
Underneath the flaming eagle,
With his bloody beak and talons.
Worthy mother of my being,
Name the second of destroyers.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“This the second of destroyers:
When thou hast a distance wandered,
Only two days hast thou travelled,
Comes a pit of fire to meet thee,
In the centre of the highway,
Eastward far the pit extending,
Stretches endless to the westward,
Filled with burning coals and pebbles,
Glowing with the heat of ages;
Hundreds has this monster swallowed,
In his jaws have thousands perished,
Hundreds with their trusty broadswords,
Thousands on their fiery chargers.”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:
“Never will the hero perish
In the jaws of such a monster;
Know I well the means of safety,
Know a remedy efficient:
I will make of snow a master,
On the snow-clad fields, a hero,
Drive the snow-man on before me,
Drive him through the flaming vortex,
Drive him through the fiery furnace,
With my magic broom of copper;
I will follow in his shadow,
Follow close the magic image,
Thus escape the frightful monster,
With my golden locks uninjured,
With my flowing beard untangled.
Ancient mother of my being,
Name the last of the destructions,
Name the third of the destroyers.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“This the third of fatal dangers:
Hast thou gone a greater distance,
Hast thou travelled one day longer,
To the portals of Pohyola,
To the narrowest of gate-ways,
There a wolf will rise to meet thee,
There the black-bear sneak upon thee;
In Pohyola’s darksome portals,
Hundreds in their jaws have perished,
Have devoured a thousand heroes;
Wherefore will they not destroy thee,
Since thy form is unprotected?”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:
“Let them eat the gentle lambkins,
Feed upon their tender tissues,
They cannot devour this hero;
I am girded with my buckler,
Girded with my belt of copper,
Armlets wear I of the master,
From the wolf and bear protected,
Will not hasten to Untamo.
I can meet the wolf of Lempo,
For the bear I have a balsam,
For his mouth I conjure bridles,
For the wolf, forge chains of iron;
I will smite them as the willow,
Chop them into little fragments,
Thus I’ll gain the open court-yard,
Thus triumphant end my journey.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Then thy journey is not ended,
Greater dangers still await thee,
Great the wonders yet before thee,
Horrors three within thy pathway;
Three great dangers of the hero
Still await thy reckless footsteps,
These the worst of all thy dangers:
When thou hast still farther wandered,
Thou wilt reach the Court of Pohya,
Where the walls are forged from iron,
And from steel the outer bulwark;
Rises from the earth to heaven,
Back again to earth returning;
Double spears are used for railings,
On each spear are serpents winding,
On each rail are stinging adders;
Lizards too adorn the bulwarks,
Play their long tails in the sunlight,
Hissing lizards, venomed serpents,
Jump and writhe upon the rampart,
Turn their horrid heads to meet thee;
On the greensward lie the monsters,
On the ground the things of evil,
With their pliant tongues of venom,
Hissing, striking, crawling, writhing;
One more horrid than the others,
Lies before the fatal gate-way,
Longer than the longest rafters,
Larger than the largest portals;
Hisses with the tongue of anger,
Lifts his head in awful menace,
Raises it to strike none other
Than the hero of the islands.”

Spake the warlike Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:
“By such things the children perish,
Such is not the death of heroes;
Know I well the fire to manage,
I can quench the flames of passion,
I can meet the prowling wild-beasts,
Can appease the wrath of serpents,
I can heal the sting of adders,
I have plowed the serpent-pastures,
Plowed the adder-fields of Northland;
While my hands were unprotected,
Held the serpents in my fingers,
Drove the adders to Manala,
On my hands the blood of serpents,
On my feet the fat of adders.
Never will thy hero stumble
On the serpents of the Northland;
With my heel I’ll crush the monsters,
Stamp the horrid things to atoms;
I will banish them from Pohya,
Drive them to Manala’s kingdom,
Step within Pohyola’s mansion,
Walk the halls of Sariola!”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Do not go, my son beloved,
To the firesides of Pohyola,
Through the Northland fields and fallows;
There are warriors with broadswords,
Heroes clad in mail of copper,
Are on beer intoxicated,
By the beer are much embittered;
They will charm thee, hapless creature,
On the tips of swords of magic;
Greater heroes have been conjured,
Stronger ones have been outwitted.”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Formerly thy son resided
In the hamlets of Pohyola;
Laplanders cannot enchant me,
Nor the Turyalanders harm me;
I the Laplander will conjure,
Charm him with my magic powers,
Sing his shoulders wide asunder,
In his chin I’ll sing a fissure,
Sing his collar-bone to pieces,
Sing his breast to thousand fragments.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Foolish son, ungrateful wizard,
Boasting of thy former visit,
Boasting of thy fatal journey!
Once in Northland thou wert living,
In the homesteads of Pohyola;
There thou tried to swim the whirlpool,
Tasted there the dog-tongue waters,
Floated down the fatal current,
Sank beneath its angry billows;
Thou hast seen Tuoni’s river,
Thou hast measured Mana’s waters,
There to-day thou wouldst be sleeping,
Had it not been for thy mother!
What I tell thee well remember,
Shouldst thou gain Pohyola’s chambers,
Filled with stakes thou’lt find the court-yard,
These to hold the heads of heroes;
There thy head will rest forever,
Shouldst thou go to Sariola.”
Spake the warlike Lemminkainen:
“Fools indeed may heed thy counsel,
Cowards too may give attention;
Those of seven conquest-summers
Cannot heed such weak advising.
Bring to me my battle-armor,
Bring my magic mail of copper,
Bring me too my father’s broadsword,
Keep the old man’s blade from rusting;
Long it has been cold and idle,
Long has lain in secret places,
Long and constantly been weeping,
Long been asking for a bearer.”

Then he took his mail of copper,
Took his ancient battle-armor,
Took his father’s sword of magic,
Tried its point against the oak-wood,
Tried its edge upon the sorb-tree;
In his hand the blade was bended,
Like the limber boughs of willow,
Like the juniper in summer.
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“There is none in Pohya’s hamlets,
In the courts of Sariola,
That with me can measure broadswords,
That can meet this blade ancestral.”

From the nail he took a cross-bow,
Took the strongest from the rafters,
Spake these words in meditation:
“I shall recognize as worthy,
Recognize that one a hero
That can bend this mighty cross-bow,
That can break its magic sinews,
In the hamlets of Pohyola.”

Lemminkainen, filled with courage,
Girds himself in suit of battle,
Dons his mighty mail of copper,
To his servant speaks as follows:
“Trusty slave, and whom I purchased,
Whom I bought with gold and silver,
Quick prepare my fiery charger,
Harness well my steed of battle;
I am going to the feasting,
To the banquet-fields of Lempo.”

Quick obeys the faithful servant,
Hitches well the noble war-horse,
Quick prepares the fire-red stallion,
Speaks these words when all is ready:
“I have done what thou hast hidden,
Ready harnessed is the charger,
Waiting to obey his master.”

Comes the hour of the departing
Of the hero, Lemminkainen,
Right hand ready, left unwilling,
All his anxious fingers pain him,
Till at last in full obedience,
All his members give permission;
Starts the hero on his journey,
While the mother gives him counsel,
At the threshold of the dwelling,
At the highway of the court-yard:
“Child of courage, my beloved,
Son of strength, my wisdom-hero,
If thou goest to the feasting,
Shouldst thou reach the great carousal,
Drink thou only a half a cupful,
Drink the goblet to the middle,
Always give the half remaining,
Give the worse half to another,
To another more unworthy;
In the lower half are serpents,
Worms, and frogs, and hissing lizards,
Feeding on the slimy bottom.”

Furthermore she tells her hero,
Gives her son these sage directions,
On the border of the court-yard,
At the portals farthest distant:
“If thou goest to the banquet,
Shouldst thou reach the great carousal,
Occupy but half the settle,
Take but half a stride in walking,
Give the second half to others,
To another less deserving;
Only thus thou’lt be a hero,
Thus become a son immortal;
In the guest-rooms look courageous,
Bravely move about the chambers,
In the gatherings of heroes,
With the hosts of magic valor.”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Quickly leaped upon the cross-bench
Of his battle-sledge of wonder,
Raised his pearl-enamelled birch-rod,
Snapped his whip above his charger,
And the steed flew onward fleetly,
Galloped on his distant journey.

He had travelled little distance,
When a flight of hazel-chickens
Quick arose before his coming,
Flew before the foaming racer.
There were left some feathers lying,
Feathers of the hazel-chickens,
Lying in the hero’s pathway.
These the reckless Lemminkainen
Gathered for their magic virtues,
Put them in his pouch of leather,
Did not know what things might happen
On his journey to Pohyola;
All things have some little value,
In a strait all things are useful.

Then he drove a little distance,
Galloped farther on the highway,
When his courser neighed in danger,
And the fleet-foot ceased his running.
Then the stout-heart, Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Rose upon his seat in wonder,
Craned his neck and looked about him.
Found it as his mother told him,
Found a stream of fire opposing;
Ran the fire-stream like a river,
Ran across the hero’s pathway.
In the river was a fire-fall,
In the cataract a fire-rock,
On the rock a fiery hillock,
On its summit perched an eagle,
From his throat the fire was streaming
To the crater far below him,
Fire out-shooting from his feathers,
Glowing with a fiery splendor;
Long he looked upon the hero,
Long he gazed on Lemminkainen,
Then the eagle thus addressed him:
“Whither art thou driving, Ahti,
Whither going, Lemminkainen?”
Kaukomieli spake in answer:
“To the feastings of Pohyola,
To the drinking-halls of Louhi,
To the banquet of her people;
Move aside and let me journey,
Move a little from my pathway,
Let this wanderer pass by thee,
I am warlike Lemminkainen.”

This the answer of the eagle,
Screaming from his throat of splendor:
“Though thou art wild Lemminkainen,
I shall let thee wander onward,
Through my fire-throat let thee journey,
Through these flames shall be thy passage
To the banquet-halls of Louhi,
To Pohyola’s great carousal!”

Little heeding, Kaukomieli
Thinks himself in little trouble,
Thrusts his fingers in his pockets,
Searches in his pouch of leather,
Quickly takes the magic feathers,
Feathers from the hazel-chickens,
Rubs them into finest powder,
Rubs them with his magic fingers,
Whence a flight of birds arises,
Hazel-chickens from the feathers,
Large the bevy of the young birds.
Quick the wizard, Lemminkainen,
Drives them to the eagle’s fire-mouth,
Thus to satisfy his hunger,
Thus to quench the fire out-streaming.
Thus escapes the reckless hero,
Thus escapes the first of dangers,
Passes thus the first destroyer,
On his journey to Pohyola.

With his whip he strikes his courser,
With his birch-whip, pearl-enamelled;
Straightway speeds the fiery charger,
Noiselessly upon his journey,
Gallops fast and gallops faster,
Till the flying steed in terror
Neighs again and ceases running.
Lemminkainen, quickly rising,
Cranes his neck and looks about him,
Sees his mother’s words were truthful,
Sees her augury well-taken.
Lo! before him yawned a fire-gulf,
Stretching crosswise through his pathway;
Far to east the gulf extending,
To the west an endless distance,
Filled with stones and burning pebbles,
Running streams of burning matter.

Little heeding, Lemminkainen
Cries aloud in prayer to Ukko:
“Ukko, thou O God above me,
Dear Creator, omnipresent,
From the north-west send a storm-cloud,
From the east, dispatch a second,
From the south send forth a third one;
Let them gather from the south-west,
Sew their edges well together,
Fill thou well the interspaces,
Send a snow-fall high as heaven,
Let it fall from upper ether,
Fall upon the flaming fire-pit,
On the cataract and whirlpool!”

Mighty Ukko, the Creator,
Ukko, father omnipresent,
Dwelling in the courts of heaven,
Sent a storm-cloud from the north-west,
From the east he sent a second,
From the south despatched a third one,
Let them gather from the south-west,
Sewed their edges well together,
Filled their many interspaces,
Sent a snow-fall high as heaven,
From the giddy heights of ether,
Sent it seething to the fire-pit,
On the streams of burning matter;
From the snow-fall in the fire-pond,
Grows a lake with rolling billows.
Quick the hero, Lemminkainen,
Conjures there of ice a passage
From one border to the other,
Thus escapes his second danger,
Thus his second trouble passes.

Then the reckless Lemminkainen
Raised his pearl-enamelled birch-rod,
Snapped his whip above his racer,
And the steed flew onward swiftly,
Galloped on his distant journey
O’er the highway to Pohyola;
Galloped fast and galloped faster,
Galloped on a greater distance,
When the stallion loudly neighing,
Stopped and trembled on the highway.
Then the lively Lemminkainen
Raised himself upon the cross-bench,
Looked to see what else had happened;
Lo! a wolf stands at the portals,
In the passage-way a black-bear,
At the high-gate of Pohyola,
At the ending of the journey.

Thereupon young Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Thrusts his fingers in his pockets,
Seeks his magic pouch of leather,
Pulls therefrom a lock of ewe-wool,
Rubs it firmly in his fingers,
In his hands it falls to powder;
Breathes the breath of life upon it,
When a flock of sheep arises,
Goats and sheep of sable color;
On the flock the black-wolf pounces,
And the wild-bear aids the slaughter,
While the reckless Lemminkainen
Rushes by them on his journey;
Gallops on a little distance,
To the court of Sariola,
Finds the fence of molten iron,
And of steel the rods and pickets,
In the earth a hundred fathoms,
To the azure sky, a thousand,
Double-pointed spears projecting;
On each spear were serpents twisted,
Adders coiled in countless numbers,
Lizards mingled with the serpents,
Tails entangled pointing earthward,
While their heads were skyward whirling,
Writhing, hissing mass of evil.

Then the stout-heart, Kaukomieli,
Deeply thought and long considered:
“It is as my mother told me,
This the wall that she predicted,
Stretching from the earth to heaven;
Downward deep are serpents creeping,
Deeper still the rails extending;
High as highest flight of eagles,
Higher still the wall shoots upward.”

But the hero, Lemminkainen,
Little cares, nor feels disheartened,
Draws his broadsword from its scabbard,
Draws his mighty blade ancestral,
Hews the wall with might of magic,
Breaks the palisade in pieces,
Hews to atoms seven pickets,
Chops the serpent-wall to fragments;
Through the breach he quickly passes
To the portals of Pohyola.

In the way, a serpent lying,
Lying crosswise in the entry,
Longer than the longest rafters,
Larger than the posts of oak-wood;
Hundred-eyed, the heinous serpent,
And a thousand tongues, the monster,
Eyes as large as sifting vessels,
Tongues as long as shafts of javelins,
Teeth as large as hatchet-handles,
Back as broad as skiffs of ocean.
Lemminkainen does not venture
Straightway through this host opposing,
Through the hundred heads of adders,
Through the thousand tongues of serpents.
Spake the magic Lemminkainen:
“Venomed viper, thing of evil,
Ancient adder of Tuoni,
Thou that crawlest in the stubble,
Through the flower-roots of Lempo,
Who has sent thee from thy kingdom,
Sent thee from thine evil coverts,
Sent thee hither, crawling, writhing,
In the pathway I would travel?
Who bestowed thy mouth of venom,
Who insisted, who commanded,
Thou shouldst raise thy head toward heaven,
Who thy tail has given action?
Was this given by the father,
Did the mother give this power,
Or the eldest of the brothers,
Or the youngest of the sisters,
Or some other of thy kindred?

“Close thy mouth, thou thing of evil,
Hide thy pliant tongue of venom,
In a circle wrap thy body,
Coil thou like a shield in silence,
Give to me one-half the pathway,
Let this wanderer pass by thee,
Or remove thyself entirely;
Get thee hence to yonder heather,
Quick retreat to bog and stubble,
Hide thyself in reeds and rushes,
In the brambles of the lowlands.
Like a ball of flax enfolding,
Like a sphere of aspen-branches,
With thy head and tail together,
Roll thyself to yonder mountain;
In the heather is thy dwelling,
Underneath the sod thy caverns.
Shouldst thou raise thy head in anger,
Mighty Ukko will destroy it,
Pierce it with his steel-tipped arrows,
With his death-balls made of iron!”

Hardly had the hero ended,
When the monster, little heeding,
Hissing with his tongue in anger,
Plying like the forked lightning,
Pounces with his mouth of venom
At the head of Lemminkainen;
But the hero, quick recalling,
Speaks the master-words of knowledge,
Words that came from distant ages,
Words his ancestors had taught him,
Words his mother learned in childhood,
These the words of Lemminkainen:
“Since thou wilt not heed mine order,
Since thou wilt not leave the highway,
Puffed with pride of thine own greatness,
Thou shall burst in triple pieces.
Leave thy station for the borders,
I will hunt thine ancient mother,
Sing thine origin of evil,
How arose thy head of horror;
Suoyatar, thine ancient mother,
Thing of evil, thy creator!

“Suoyatar once let her spittle
Fall upon the waves of ocean;
This was rocked by winds and waters,
Shaken by the ocean-currents,
Six years rocked upon the billows,
Rocked in water seven summers,
On the blue-back of the ocean,
On the billows high as heaven;
Lengthwise did the billows draw it,
And the sunshine gave it softness,
To the shore the billows washed it,
On the coast the waters left it.

“Then appeared Creation’s daughters,
Three the daughters thus appearing,
On the roaring shore of ocean,
There beheld the spittle lying,
And the daughters spake as follows:
‘What would happen from this spittle,
Should the breath of the Creator
Fall upon the writhing matter,
Breathe the breath of life upon it,
Give the thing the sense of vision?’

“The Creator heard these measures,
Spake himself the words that follow:
‘Evil only comes from evil,
This is the expectoration
Of fell Suoyatar, its mother;
Therefore would the thing be evil,
Should I breathe a soul within it,
Should I give it sense of vision.’

“Hisi heard this conversation,
Ever ready with his mischief,
Made himself to be creator,
Breathed a soul into the spittle,
To fell Suoyatar’s fierce anger.
Thus arose the poison-monster,
Thus was born the evil serpent,
This the origin of evil.

“Whence the life that gave her action?
From the carbon-pile of Hisi.
Whence then was her heart created?
From the heart-throbs of her mother.
Whence arose her brain of evil?
From the foam of rolling waters.
Whence was consciousness awakened?
From the waterfall’s commotion.
Whence arose her head of venom?
From the seed-germs of the ivy.
Whence then came her eyes of fury?
From the flaxen seeds of Lempo.
Whence the evil ears for hearing?
From the foliage of Hisi.
Whence then was her mouth created?
This from Suoyatar’s foam-currents.
Whence arose thy tongue of anger?
From the spear of Keitolainen.
Whence arose thy fangs of poison?
From the teeth of Mana’s daughter.
Whence then was thy back created?
From the carbon-posts of Piru.
How then was thy tail created?
From the brain of the hobgoblin.
Whence arose thy writhing entrails?
From the death-belt of Tuoni.

“This thine origin, O Serpent,
This thy charm of evil import,
Vilest thing of God’s creation,
Writhing, hissing thing of evil,
With the color of Tuoni,
With the shade of earth and heaven,
With the darkness of the storm-cloud.
Get thee hence, thou loathsome monster,
Clear the pathway of this hero.
I am mighty Lemminkainen,
On my journey to Pohyola,
To the feastings and carousals,
In the halls of darksome Northland.”

Thereupon the snake uncoiling,
Hundred-eyed and heinous monster,
Crawled away to other portals,
That the hero, Kaukomieli,
Might proceed upon his errand,
To the dismal Sariola,
To the feastings and carousals
In the banquet-halls of Pohya.




RUNE XXVII.
THE UNWELCOME GUEST.


I have brought young Kaukomieli,
Brought the Islander and hero,
Also known as Lemminkainen,
Through the jaws of death and ruin,
Through the darkling deeps of Kalma,
To the homesteads of Pohyola,
To the dismal courts of Louhi;
Now must I relate his doings,
Must relate to all my hearers,
How the merry Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Wandered through Pohyola’s chambers,
Through the halls of Sariola,
How the hero went unbidden
To the feasting and carousal,
Uninvited to the banquet.

Lemminkainen full of courage,
Full of life, and strength, and magic,
Stepped across the ancient threshold,
To the centre of the court-room,
And the floors of linwood trembled,
Walls and ceilings creaked and murmured.

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
These the words that Ahti uttered:
“Be ye greeted on my coming,
Ye that greet, be likewise greeted!
Listen, all ye hosts of Pohya;
Is there food about this homestead,
Barley for my hungry courser,
Beer to give a thirsty stranger?”

Sat the host of Sariola
At the east end of the table,
Gave this answer to the questions:
“Surely is there in this homestead,
For thy steed an open stable,
Never will this host refuse thee,
Shouldst thou act a part becoming,
Worthy, coming to these portals,
Waiting near the birchen rafters,
In the spaces by the kettles,
By the triple hooks of iron.”

Then the reckless Lemminkainen
Shook his sable locks and answered:
“Lempo may perchance come hither,
Let him fill this lowly station,
Let him stand between the kettles,
That with soot he may be blackened.
Never has my ancient father,
Never has the dear old hero,
Stood upon a spot unworthy,
At the portals near the rafters;
For his steed the best of stables,
Food and shelter gladly furnished,
And a room for his attendants,
Corners furnished for his mittens,
Hooks provided for his snow-shoes,
Halls in waiting for his helmet.
Wherefore then should I not find here
What my father found before me?”

To the centre walked the hero,
Walked around the dining table,
Sat upon a bench and waited,
On a bench of polished fir-wood,
And the kettle creaked beneath him.
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“As a guest am I unwelcome,
Since the waiters bring no viands,
Bring no dishes to the stranger?”

Ilpotar, the Northland hostess,
Then addressed the words that follow:
“Lemminkainen, thou art evil,
Thou art here, but not invited,
Thou hast not the look of kindness,
Thou wilt give me throbbing temples,
Thou art bringing pain and sorrow.
All our beer is in the barley,
All the malt is in the kernel,
All our grain is still ungarnered,
And our dinner has been eaten;
Yesterday thou shouldst have been here,
Come again some future season.”

Whereupon wild Lemminkainen
Pulled his mouth awry in anger,
Shook his coal-black locks and answered:
“All the tables here are empty,
And the feasting-time is over;
All the beer has left the goblets,
Empty too are all the pitchers,
Empty are the larger vessels.
O thou hostess of Pohyola,
Toothless dame of dismal Northland,
Badly managed is thy wedding,
And thy feast is ill-conducted,
Like the dogs hast thou invited;
Thou hast baked the honey-biscuit,
Wheaten loaves of greatest virtue,
Brewed thy beer from hops and barley,
Sent abroad thine invitations,
Six the hamlets thou hast honored,
Nine the villages invited
By thy merry wedding-callers.
Thou hast asked the poor and lowly,
Asked the hosts of common people,
Asked the blind, and deaf, and crippled,
Asked a multitude of beggars,
Toilers by the day, and hirelings;
Asked the men of evil habits,
Asked the maids with braided tresses,
I alone was not invited.
How could such a slight be given,
Since I sent thee kegs of barley?
Others sent thee grain in cupfuls,
Brought it sparingly in dippers,
While I sent thee fullest measure,
Sent the half of all my garners,
Of the richest of my harvest,
Of the grain that I had gathered.
Even now young Lemminkainen,
Though a guest of name and station,
Has no beer, no food, no welcome,
Naught for him art thou preparing,
Nothing cooking in thy kettles,
Nothing brewing in thy cellars
For the hero of the Islands,
At the closing of his journey.”

Ilpotar, the ancient hostess,
Gave this order to her servants:
“Come, my pretty maiden-waiter,
Servant-girl to me belonging,
Lay some salmon to the broiling,
Bring some beer to give the stranger!”

Small of stature was the maiden,
Washer of the banquet-platters,
Rinser of the dinner-ladles,
Polisher of spoons of silver,
And she laid some food in kettles,
Only bones and heads of whiting,
Turnip-stalks and withered cabbage,
Crusts of bread and bits of biscuit.
Then she brought some beer in pitchers,
Brought of common drink the vilest,
That the stranger, Lemminkainen,
Might have drink, and meat in welcome,
Thus to still his thirst and hunger.
Then the maiden spake as follows:
“Thou art sure a mighty hero,
Here to drink the beer of Pohya,
Here to empty all our vessels!”

Then the minstrel, Lemminkainen,
Closely handled all the pitchers,
Looking to the very bottoms;
There beheld he writhing serpents,
In the centre adders swimming,
On the borders worms and lizards.
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,
Filled with anger, spake as follows:
“Get ye hence, ye things of evil,
Get ye hence to Tuonela,
With the bearer of these pitchers,
With the maid that brought ye hither,
Ere the evening moon has risen,
Ere the day-star seeks the ocean!
O thou wretched beer of barley,
Thou hast met with great dishonor,
Into disrepute hast fallen,
But I’ll drink thee, notwithstanding,
And the rubbish cast far from me.”

Then the hero to his pockets
Thrust his first and unnamed finger,
Searching in his pouch of leather;
Quick withdraws a hook for fishing,
Drops it to the pitcher’s bottom,
Through the worthless beer of barley;
On his fish-book hang the serpents,
Catches many hissing adders,
Catches frogs in magic numbers,
Catches blackened worms in thousands,
Casts them to the floor before him,
Quickly draws his heavy broad sword,
And decapitates the serpents.

Now he drinks the beer remaining,
When the wizard speaks as follows:
“As a guest am I unwelcome,
Since no beer to me is given
That is worthy of a hero;
Neither has a ram been butchered,
Nor a fattened calf been slaughtered,
Worthy food for Lemminkainen.”

Then the landlord of Pohyola
Answered thus the Island-minstrel:
“Wherefore hast thou journeyed hither,
Who has asked thee for thy presence?”
Spake in answer Lemminkainen:
“Happy is the guest invited,
Happier when not expected;
Listen, son of Pohylander,
Host of Sariola, listen:
Give me beer for ready payment,
Give me worthy drink for money!”

Then the landlord of Pohyola,
In bad humor, full of anger,
Conjured in the earth a lakelet,
At the feet of Kaukomieli,
Thus addressed the Island-hero:
“Quench thy thirst from yonder lakelet,
There, the beer that thou deservest!”

Little heeding, Lemminkainen
To this insolence made answer:
“I am neither bear nor roebuck,
That should drink this filthy water,
Drink the water of this lakelet.”

Ahti then began to conjure,
Conjured he a bull before him,
Bull with horns of gold and silver,
And the bull drank from the lakelet,
Drank he from the pool in pleasure.
Then the landlord of Pohyola
There a savage wolf created,
Set him on the floor before him
To destroy the bull of magic.
Lemminkainen, full of courage,
Conjured up a snow-white rabbit,
Set him on the floor before him
To attract the wolf’s attention.
Then the landlord of Pohyola
Conjured there a dog of Lempo,
Set him on the floor before him
To destroy the magic rabbit.
Lemminkainen, full of mischief,
Conjured on the roof a squirrel,
That by jumping on the rafters
He might catch the dog’s attention.
But the master of the Northland
Conjured there a golden marten,
And he drove the magic squirrel
From his seat upon the rafters.
Lemminkainen, full of mischief,
Made a fox of scarlet color,
And it ate the golden marten.
Then the master of Pohyola
Conjured there a hen to flutter
Near the fox of scarlet color.
Lemminkainen, full of mischief,
Thereupon a hawk created,
That with beak and crooked talons
He might tear the hen to pieces.

Spake the landlord of Pohyola,
These the words the tall man uttered:
“Never will this feast be bettered
Till the guests are less in number;
I must do my work as landlord,
Get thee hence, thou evil stranger,
Cease thy conjurings of evil,
Leave this banquet of my people,
Haste away, thou wicked wizard,
To thine Island-home and people!”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Thus no hero will be driven,
Not a son of any courage
Will be frightened by thy presence,
Will be driven from thy banquet.”

Then the landlord of Pohyola
Snatched his broadsword from the rafters,
Drew it rashly from the scabbard,
Thus addressing Lemminkainen:
“Ahti, Islander of evil,
Thou the handsome Kaukomieli,
Let us measure then our broadswords,
Let our skill be fully tested;
Surely is my broadsword better
Than the blade within thy scabbard.”
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“That my blade is good and trusty,
Has been proved on heads of heroes,
Has on many bones been tested;
Be that as it may, my fellow,
Since thine order is commanding,
Let our swords be fully tested,
Let us see whose blade is better.
Long ago my hero-father
Tested well this sword in battle,
Never failing in a conflict.
Should his son be found less worthy?”

Then he grasped his mighty broadsword,
Drew the fire-blade from the scabbard
Hanging from his belt of copper.
Standing on their hilts their broadswords,
Carefully their blades were measured,
Found the sword of Northland’s master
Longer than the sword of Ahti
By the half-link of a finger.
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen.
“Since thou hast the longer broadsword,
Thou shalt make the first advances,
I am ready for thy weapon.”

Thereupon Pohyola’s landlord
With the wondrous strength of anger,
Tried in vain to slay the hero,
Strike the crown of Lemminkainen;
Chipped the splinters from the rafters,
Cut the ceiling into fragments,
Could not touch the Island-hero.

Thereupon brave Kaukomieli,
Thus addressed Pohyola’s master:
“Have the rafters thee offended?
What the crimes they have committed,
Since thou hewest them in pieces?
Listen now, thou host of Northland,
Reckless landlord of Pohyola,
Little room there is for swordsmen
In these chambers filled with women;
We shall stain these painted rafters,
Stain with blood these floors and ceilings;
Let us go without the mansion,
In the field is room for combat,
On the plain is space sufficient;
Blood looks fairer in the court-yard,
Better in the open spaces,
Let it dye the snow-fields scarlet.”

To the yard the heroes hasten,
There they find a monstrous ox-skin,
Spread it on the field of battle;
On the ox-skin stand the swordsmen.
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“Listen well, thou host of Northland,
Though thy broadsword is the longer,
Though thy blade is full of horror,
Thou shalt have the first advantage;
Use with skill thy boasted broadsword
Ere the final bout is given,
Ere thy head be chopped in pieces;
Strike with skill, or thou wilt perish,
Strike, and do thy best for Northland.”

Thereupon Pohyola’s landlord
Raised on high his blade of battle,
Struck a heavy blow in anger,
Struck a second, then a third time,
But he could not touch his rival,
Could not draw a single blood-drop
From the veins of Lemminkainen,
Skillful Islander and hero.
Spake the handsome Kaukomieli:
“Let me try my skill at fencing,
Let me swing my father’s broadsword,
Let my honored blade be tested!”
But the landlord of Pohyola,
Does not heed the words of Ahti,
Strikes in fury, strikes unceasing,
Ever aiming, ever missing.
When the skillful Lemminkainen
Swings his mighty blade of magic,
Fire disports along his weapon,
Flashes from his sword of honor,
Glistens from the hero’s broadsword,
Balls of fire disporting, dancing,
On the blade of mighty Ahti,
Overflow upon the shoulders
Of the landlord of Pohyola.
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“O thou son of Sariola,
See! indeed thy neck is glowing
Like the dawning of the morning,
Like the rising Sun in ocean!”

Quickly turned Pohyola’s landlord,
Thoughtless host of darksome Northland,
To behold the fiery splendor
Playing on his neck and shoulders.
Quick as lightning, Lemminkainen,
With his father’s blade of battle,
With a single blow of broadsword,
With united skill and power,
Lopped the head of Pohya’s master;
As one cleaves the stalks of turnips,
As the ear falls from the corn-stalk,
As one strikes the fins from salmon,
Thus the head rolled from the shoulders
Of the landlord of Pohyola,
Like a ball it rolled and circled.

In the yard were pickets standing,
Hundreds were the sharpened pillars,
And a head on every picket,
Only one was left un-headed.
Quick the victor, Lemminkainen,
Took the head of Pohya’s landlord,
Spiked it on the empty picket.

Then the Islander, rejoicing,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Quick returning to the chambers,
Gave this order to the hostess:
“Evil maiden, bring me water,
Wherewithal to cleanse my fingers
From the blood of Northland’s master,
Wicked host of Sariola.”

Ilpotar, the Northland hostess,
Fired with anger, threatened vengeance,
Conjured men with heavy broadswords,
Heroes clad in copper-armor,
Hundred warriors with their javelins,
And a thousand bearing cross-bows,
To destroy the Island-hero,
For the death of Lemminkainen.
Kaukomieli soon discovered
That the time had come for leaving,
That his presence was unwelcome
At the feasting of Pohyola,
At the banquet of her people.




RUNE XXVIII.
THE MOTHER’S COUNSEL.


Ahti, hero of the Islands,
Wild magician, Lemminkainen,
Also known as Kaukomieli,
Hastened from the great carousal,
From the banquet-halls of Louhi,
From the ever-darksome Northland,
From the dismal Sariola.
Stormful strode he from the mansion,
Hastened like the smoke of battle,
From the court-yard of Pohyola,
Left his crimes and misdemeanors
In the halls of ancient Louhi.
Then he looked in all directions,
Seeking for his tethered courser,
Anxious looked in field and stable,
But he did not find his racer;
Found a black thing in the fallow,
Proved to be a clump of willows.
Who will well advise the hero,
Who will give him wise directions,
Guide the wizard out of trouble,
Give his hero-locks protection,
Keep his magic head from danger
From the warriors of Northland?

Noise is heard within the village,
And a din from other homesteads,
From the battle-hosts of Louhi,
Streaming from the doors and window,
Of the homesteads of Pohyola.

Thereupon young Lemminkainen,
Handsome Islander and hero,
Changing both his form and features,
Clad himself in other raiment,
Changing to another body,
Quick became a mighty eagle,
Soared aloft on wings of magic,
Tried to fly to highest heaven,
But the moonlight burned his temples,
And the sunshine singed his feathers.

Then entreating, Lemminkainen,
Island-hero, turned to Ukko,
This the prayer that Ahti uttered:
“Ukko, God of love and mercy,
Thou the Wisdom of the heavens,
Wise Director of the lightning,
Thou the Author of the thunder,
Thou the Guide of all the cloudlets,
Give to me thy cloak of vapor,
Throw a silver cloud around me,
That I may in its protection
Hasten to my native country,
To my mother’s Island-dwelling,
Fly to her that waits my coming,
With a mother’s grave forebodings.”

Farther, farther, Lemminkainen
Flew and soared on eagle-pinions,
Looked about him, backwards, forwards,
Spied a gray-hawk soaring near him,
In his eyes the fire of splendor,
Like the eyes of Pohyalanders,
Like the eyes of Pohya’s spearmen,
And the gray-hawk thus addressed him:
“Ho! there! hero, Lemminkainen,
Art thou thinking of our combat
With the hero-heads of Northland?”

Thus the Islander made answer,
These the words of Kaukomieli:
“O thou gray-hawk, bird of beauty,
Fly direct to Sariola,
Fly as fast as wings can bear thee;
When thou hast arrived in safety,
On the plains of darksome Northland,
Tell the archers and the spearmen,
They will never catch the eagle,
In his journey from Pohyola,
To his Island-home and fortress.”

Then the Ahti-eagle hastened
Straightway to his mother’s cottage,
In his face the look of trouble,
In his heart the pangs of sorrow.
Ahti’s mother ran to meet him,
When she spied him in the pathway,
Walking toward her island-dwelling;
These the words the mother uttered:
“Of my sons thou art the bravest,
Art the strongest of my children;
Wherefore then comes thine annoyance,
On returning from Pohyola?
Wert thou worsted at the banquet,
At the feast and great carousal?
At thy cups, if thou wert injured,
Thou shalt here have better treatment,
Thou shalt have the cup thy father
Brought me from the hero-castle.”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Worthy mother, thou that nursed me,
If I had been maimed at drinking,
I the landlord would have worsted,
Would have slain a thousand heroes,
Would have taught them useful lessons.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Wherefore then art thou indignant,
Didst thou meet disgrace and insult,
Did they rob thee of thy courser?
Buy thou then a better courser
With the riches of thy mother,
With thy father’s horded treasures.”
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“Faithful mother of my being,
If my steed had been insulted,
If for him my heart was injured,
I the landlord would have punished,
Would have punished all the horsemen,
All of Pohya’s strongest riders.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Tell me then thy dire misfortune,
What has happened to my hero,
On his journey to Pohyola?
Have the Northland maidens scorned thee,
Have the women ridiculed thee?
If the maidens scorned thy presence,
If the women gave derision,
There are others thou canst laugh at,
Thou canst scorn a thousand women.”
Said the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Honored mother, fond and faithful,
If the Northland dames had scorned me
Or the maidens laughed derision,
I the maidens would have punished,
Would have scorned a thousand women.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Wherefore then are thou indignant,
Thus annoyed, and heavy-hearted,
On returning from Pohyola?
Was thy feasting out of season,
Was the banquet-beer unworthy,
Were thy dreams of evil import
When asleep in darksome Northland?”
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:
“Aged women may remember
What they dream on beds of trouble;
I have seen some wondrous visions,
Since I left my Island-cottage.
My beloved, helpful mother,
Fill my bag with good provisions,
Flour and salt in great abundance,
Farther must thy hero wander,
He must leave his home behind him,
Leave his pleasant Island-dwelling,
Journey from this home of ages;
Men are sharpening their broadswords,
Sharpening their spears and lances,
For the death of Lemminkainen.”

Then again the mother questioned,
Hurriedly she asked the reason:
“Why the men their swords were whetting,
Why their spears are being sharpened.”

Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:
“Therefore do they whet their broadswords,
Therefore sharpen they their lances:
It is for thy son’s destruction,
At his heart are aimed their lances.
In the court-yard of Pohyola,
There arose a great contention,
Fierce the battle waged against me;
But I slew the Northland hero,
Killed the host of Sariola;
Quick to arms rose Louhi’s people,
All the spears and swords of Northland
Were directed at thy hero;
All of Pohya turned against me,
Turned against a single foeman.”
This the answer of the mother:
“I had told thee this beforehand,
I had warned thee of this danger,
And forbidden thee to journey
To the hostile fields of Northland.
Here my hero could have lingered,
Passed his life in full contentment,
Lived forever with his mother,
With his mother for protection,
In the court-yard with his kindred;
Here no war would have arisen,
No contention would have followed.
Whither wilt thou go, my hero,
Whither will my loved one hasten,
To escape thy fierce pursuers,
To escape from thy misdoings,
From thy sins to hide in safety,
From thy crimes and misdemeanors,
That thy head be not endangered,
That thy body be not mangled,
That thy locks be not outrooted?”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Know I not a spot befitting,
Do not know a place of safety,
Where to hide from my pursuers,
That will give me sure protection
From the crimes by me committed.
Helpful mother of my being,
Where to flee wilt thou advise me?”
This the answer of the mother:
“I do not know where I can send thee;
Be a pine-tree on the mountain,
Or a juniper in lowlands?
Then misfortune may befall thee;
Often is the mountain pine-tree
Cut in splints for candle-lighters;
And the juniper is often
Peeled for fence-posts for the pastures.
Go a birch-tree to the valleys,
Or an elm-tree to the glenwood?
Even then may trouble find thee,
Misery may overtake thee;
Often is the lowland birch-tree
Cut to pieces in the ware-house;
Often is the elm-wood forest
Cleared away for other plantings.
Be a berry on the highlands,
Cranberry upon the heather,
Strawberry upon the mountains,
Blackberry along the fences?
Even there will trouble find thee,
There misfortune overtake thee,
For the berry-maids would pluck thee,
Silver-tinselled girls would get thee.
Be a pike then in the ocean,
Or a troutlet in the rivers?
Then would trouble overtake thee,
Would become thy life-companion;
Then the fisherman would catch thee,
Catch thee in his net of flax-thread,
Catch thee with his cruel fish-hook.
Be a wolf then in the forest,
Or a black-bear in the thickets?
Even then would trouble find thee,
And disaster cross thy pathway;
Sable hunters of the Northland
Have their spears and cross-bows ready
To destroy the wolf and black-bear.”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Know I well the worst of places,
Know where Death will surely follow,
Where misfortune’s eye would find me;
Since thou gavest me existence,
Gavest nourishment in childhood,
Whither shall I flee for safety,
Whither hide from death and danger?
In my view is fell destruction,
Dire misfortune hovers o’er me;
On the morrow come the spearmen,
Countless warriors from Pohya,
Ahti’s head their satisfaction.”
This the answer of the mother:
“I can name a goodly refuge,
Name a land of small dimensions,
Name a distant ocean-island,
Where my son may live in safety.
Thither archers never wander,
There thy head cannot be severed;
But an oath as strong as heaven,
Thou must swear before thy mother;
Thou wilt not for sixty summers
Join in war or deadly combat,
Even though thou wishest silver,
Wishest gold and silver treasures.”
Spake the grateful Lemminkainen:
“I will swear an oath of honor,
That I’ll not in sixty summers
Draw my sword in the arena,
Test the warrior in battle;
I have wounds upon my shoulders,
On my breast two scars of broadsword,
Of my former battles, relics,
Relics of my last encounters,
On the battle-fields of Northland,
In the wars with men and heroes.”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Go thou, take thy father’s vessel,
Go and hide thyself in safety,
Travel far across nine oceans;
In the tenth, sail to the centre,
To the island, forest-covered,
To the cliffs above the waters,
Where thy father went before thee,
Where he hid from his pursuers,
In the times of summer conquests,
In the darksome days of battle;
Good the isle for thee to dwell in,
Goodly place to live and linger;
Hide one year, and then a second,
In the third return in safety
To thy mother’s island dwelling,
To thy father’s ancient mansion,
To my hero’s place of resting.”




RUNE XXIX.
THE ISLE OF REFUGE.


Lemminkainen, full of joyance,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Took provisions in abundance,
Fish and butter, bread and bacon,
Hastened to the Isle of Refuge,
Sailed away across the oceans,
Spake these measures on departing:
“Fare thee well, mine Island-dwelling,
I must sail to other borders,
To an island more protective,
Till the second summer passes;
Let the serpents keep the island,
Lynxes rest within the glen-wood,
Let the blue-moose roam the mountains,
Let the wild-geese eat the barley.
Fare thee well, my helpful mother!
When the warriors of the Northland,
From the dismal Sariola,
Come with swords, and spears, and cross-bows,
Asking for my head in vengeance,
Say that I have long departed,
Left my mother’s Island-dwelling,
When the barley had been garnered.”

Then he launched his boat of copper,
Threw the vessel to the waters,
From the iron-banded rollers,
From the cylinders of oak-wood,
On the masts the sails he hoisted,
Spread the magic sails of linen,
In the stern the hero settled
And prepared to sail his vessel,
One hand resting on the rudder.

Then the sailor spake as follows,
These the words of Lemminkainen:
“Blow, ye winds, and drive me onward,
Blow ye steady, winds of heaven,
Toward the island in the ocean,
That my bark may fly in safety
To my father’s place of refuge,
To the far and nameless island!”

Soon the winds arose as bidden,
Rocked the vessel o’er the billows,
O’er the blue-back of the waters,
O’er the vast expanse of ocean;
Blew two months and blew unceasing,
Blew a third month toward the island,
Toward his father’s Isle of Refuge.

Sat some maidens on the seaside,
On the sandy beach of ocean,
Turned about in all directions,
Looking out upon the billows;
One was waiting for her brother,
And a second for her father,
And a third one, anxious, waited
For the coming of her suitor;
There they spied young Lemminkainen,
There perceived the hero’s vessel
Sailing o’er the bounding billows;
It was like a hanging cloudlet,
Hanging twixt the earth and heaven.

Thus the island-maidens wondered,
Thus they spake to one another:
“What this stranger on the ocean,
What is this upon the waters?
Art thou one of our sea-vessels?
Wert thou builded on this island?
Sail thou straightway to the harbor,
To the island-point of landing
That thy tribe may be discovered.”

Onward did the waves propel it,
Rocked his vessel o’er the billows,
Drove it to the magic island,
Safely landed Lemminkainen
On the sandy shore and harbor.

Spake he thus when he had landed,
These the words that Ahti uttered:
“Is there room upon this island,
Is there space within this harbor,
Where my bark may lie at anchor,
Where the sun may dry my vessel?”

This the answer of the virgins,
Dwellers on the Isle of Refuge:
“There is room within this harbor,
On this island, space abundant,
Where thy bark may lie at anchor,
Where the sun may dry thy vessel;
Lying ready are the rollers,
Cylinders adorned with copper;
If thou hadst a hundred vessels,
Shouldst thou come with boats a thousand,
We would give them room in welcome.”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Rolled his vessel in the harbor,
On the cylinders of copper,
Spake these words when he had ended:
“Is there room upon this island,
Or a spot within these forests,
Where a hero may be hidden
From the coming din of battle,
From the play of spears and arrows?”
Thus replied the Island-maidens:
“There are places on this island,
On these plains a spot befitting,
Where to hide thyself in safety,
Hero-son of little valor.
Here are many, many castles,
Many courts upon this island;
Though there come a thousand heroes,
Though a thousand spearmen follow,
Thou canst hide thyself in safety.”
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“Is there room upon this island,
Where the birch-tree grows abundant,
Where this son may fell the forest,
And may cultivate the fallow?”
Answered thus the Island-maidens:
“There is not a spot befitting,
Not a place upon the island,
Where to rest thy wearied members,
Not the smallest patch of birch-wood,
Thou canst bring to cultivation.
All our fields have been divided,
All these woods have been apportioned,
Fields and forests have their owners.”

Lemminkainen asked this question,
These the words of Kaukomieli:
“Is there room upon this island,
Worthy spot in field or forest,
Where to sing my songs of magic,
Chant my gathered store of wisdom,
Sing mine ancient songs and legends?”
Answered thus the Island-maidens:
“There is room upon this island,
Worthy place in these dominions,
Thou canst sing thy garnered wisdom,
Thou canst chant thine ancient legends,
Legends of the times primeval,
In the forest, in the castle,
On the island-plains and pastures.”

Then began the reckless minstrel
To intone his wizard-sayings;
Sang he alders to the waysides,
Sang the oaks upon the mountains,
On the oak-trees sang he branches,
On each branch he sang an acorn,
On the acorns, golden rollers,
On each roller, sang a cuckoo;
Then began the cuckoos, calling,
Gold from every throat came streaming,
Copper fell from every feather,
And each wing emitted silver,
Filled the isle with precious metals.
Sang again young Lemminkainen,
Conjured on, and sang, and chanted,
Sang to precious stones the sea-sands,
Sang the stones to pearls resplendent,
Robed the groves in iridescence,
Sang the island full of flowers,
Many-colored as the rainbow.
Sang again the magic minstrel,
In the court a well he conjured,
On the well a golden cover,
On the lid a silver dipper,
That the boys might drink the water,
That the maids might lave their eyelids.
On the plains he conjured lakelets,
Sang the duck upon the waters,
Golden-cheeked and silver-headed,
Sang the feet from shining copper;
And the Island-maidens wondered,
Stood entranced at Ahti’s wisdom,
At the songs of Lemminkainen,
At the hero’s magic power.

Spake the singer, Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:
“I would sing a wondrous legend,
Sing in miracles of sweetness,
If within some hall or chamber,
I were seated at the table.
If I sing not in the castle,
In some spot by walls surrounded,
Then I sing my songs to zephyrs,
Fling them to the fields and forests.”
Answered thus the Island-maidens:
“On this isle are castle-chambers,
Halls for use of magic singers,
Courts complete for chanting legends,
Where thy singing will be welcome,
Where thy songs will not be scattered
To the forests of the island,
Nor thy wisdom lost in ether.”

Straightway Lemminkainen journeyed
With the maidens to the castle;
There he sang and conjured pitchers
On the borders of the tables,
Sang and conjured golden goblets
Foaming with the beer of barley;
Sang he many well-filled vessels,
Bowls of honey-drink abundant,
Sweetest butter, toothsome biscuit,
Bacon, fish, and veal, and venison,
All the dainties of the Northland,
Wherewithal to still his hunger.
But the proud-heart, Lemminkainen,
Was not ready for the banquet,
Did not yet begin his feasting,
Waited for a knife of silver,
For a knife of golden handle;
Quick he sang the precious metals,
Sang a blade from purest silver,
To the blade a golden handle,
Straightway then began his feasting,
Quenched his thirst and stilled his hunger,
Charmed the maidens on the island.

Then the minstrel, Lemminkainen,
Roamed throughout the island-hamlets,
To the joy of all the virgins,
All the maids of braided tresses;
Wheresoe’er he turned his footsteps,
There appeared a maid to greet him;
When his hand was kindly offered,
There his hand was kindly taken;
When he wandered out at evening,
Even in the darksome places,
There the maidens bade him welcome;
There was not an island-village
Where there were not seven castles,
In each castle seven daughters,
And the daughters stood in waiting,
Gave the hero joyful greetings,
Only one of all the maidens
Whom he did not greet with pleasure.

Thus the merry Lemminkainen
Spent three summers in the ocean,
Spent a merry time in refuge,
In the hamlets on the island,
To the pleasure of the maidens,
To the joy of all the daughters;
Only one was left neglected,
She a poor and graceless spinster,
On the isle’s remotest border,
In the smallest of the hamlets.

Then he thought about his journey
O’er the ocean to his mother,
To the cottage of his father.
There appeared the slighted spinster,
To the Northland son departing,
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:
“O, thou handsome Kaukomieli,
Wisdom-bard, and magic singer,
Since this maiden thou hast slighted,
May the winds destroy thy vessel,
Dash thy bark to countless fragments
On the ocean-rocks and ledges!”

Lemminkainen’s thoughts were homeward,
Did not heed the maiden’s murmurs,
Did not rise before the dawning
Of the morning on the island,
To the pleasure of the maiden
Of the much-neglected hamlet.
Finally at close of evening,
He resolved to leave the island,
He resolved to waken early,
Long before the dawn of morning;
Long before the time appointed,
He arose that he might wander
Through the hamlets of the island,
Bid adieu to all the maidens,
On the morn of his departure.
As he wandered hither, thither,
Walking through the village path-ways
To the last of all the hamlets;
Saw he none of all the castles,
Where three dwellings were not standing;
Saw he none of all the dwellings
Where three heroes were not watching;
Saw he none of all the heroes,
Who was not engaged in grinding
Swords, and spears, and battle-axes,
For the death of Lemminkainen.
And these words the hero uttered:
“Now alas! the Sun arises
From his couch within the ocean,
On the frailest of the heroes,
On the saddest child of Northland;
On my neck the cloak of Lempo
Might protect me from all evil,
Though a hundred foes assail me,
Though a thousand archers follow.”

Then he left the maids ungreeted,
Left his longing for the daughters
Of the nameless Isle of Refuge,
With his farewell-words unspoken,
Hastened toward the island-harbor,
Toward his magic bark at anchor;
But he found it burned to ashes,
Sweet revenge had fired his vessel,
Lighted by the slighted spinster.
Then he saw the dawn of evil,
Saw misfortune hanging over,
Saw destruction round about him.
Straightway he began rebuilding
Him a magic sailing-vessel,
New and wondrous, full of beauty;
But the hero needed timber,
Boards, and planks, and beams, and braces,
Found the smallest bit of lumber,
Found of boards but seven fragments,
Of a spool he found three pieces,
Found six pieces of the distaff;
With these fragments builds his vessel,
Builds a ship of magic virtue,
Builds the bark with secret knowledge,
Through the will of the magician;
Strikes one blow, and builds the first part,
Strikes a second, builds the centre,
Strikes a third with wondrous power,
And the vessel is completed.

Thereupon the ship he launches,
Sings the vessel to the ocean,
And these words the hero utters:
“Like a bubble swim these waters,
Like a flower ride the billows;
Loan me of thy magic feathers,
Three, O eagle, four, O raven,
For protection to my vessel,
Lest it flounder in the ocean!”

Now the sailor, Lemminkainen,
Seats himself upon the bottom
Of the vessel he has builded,
Hastens on his journey homeward,
Head depressed and evil-humored,
Cap awry upon his forehead,
Mind dejected, heavy-hearted,
That he could not dwell forever
In the castles of the daughters
Of the nameless Isle of Refuge.

Spake the minstrel, Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:
“Leave I must this merry island,
Leave her many joys and pleasures,
Leave her maids with braided tresses,
Leave her dances and her daughters,
To the joys of other heroes;
But I take this comfort with me:
All the maidens on the island,
Save the spinster who was slighted,
Will bemoan my loss for ages,
Will regret my quick departure;
They will miss me at the dances,
In the halls of mirth and joyance,
In the homes of merry maidens,
On my father’s Isle of Refuge.”

Wept the maidens on the island,
Long lamenting, loudly calling
To the hero sailing homeward:
“Whither goest, Lemminkainen,
Why depart, thou best of heroes?
Dost thou leave from inattention,
Is there here a dearth of maidens,
Have our greetings been unworthy?”

Sang the magic Lemminkainen
To the maids as he was sailing,
This in answer to their calling:
“Leaving not for want of pleasure,
Do not go from dearth of women
Beautiful the island-maidens,
Countless as the sands their virtues.
This the reason of my going,
I am longing for my home-land,
Longing for my mother’s cabins,
For the strawberries of Northland,
For the raspberries of Kalew,
For the maidens of my childhood,
For the children of my mother.”

Then the merry Lemminkainen
Bade farewell to all the island;
Winds arose and drove his vessel
On the blue-back of the ocean,
O’er the far-extending waters,
Toward the island of his mother.
On the shore were grouped the daughters
Of the magic Isle of Refuge,
On the rocks sat the forsaken,
Weeping stood the island-maidens,
Golden daughters, loud-lamenting.
Weep the maidens of the island
While the sail-yards greet their vision,
While the copper-beltings glisten;
Do not weep to lose the sail-yards,
Nor to lose the copper-beltings;
Weep they for the loss of Ahti,
For the fleeing Kaukomieli
Guiding the departing vessel.
Also weeps young Lemminkainen,
Sorely weeps, and loud-lamenting,
Weeps while he can see the island,
While the island hill-tops glisten;
Does not mourn the island-mountains,
Weeps he only for the maidens,
Left upon the Isle of Refuge.

Thereupon sailed Kaukomieli
On the blue-back of the ocean;
Sailed one day, and then a second,
But, alas! upon the third day,
There arose a mighty storm-wind,
And the sky was black with fury.
Blew the black winds from the north-west,
From the south-east came the whirlwind,
Tore away the ship’s forecastle,
Tore away the vessel’s rudder,
Dashed the wooden hull to pieces.
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Headlong fell upon the waters;
With his head he did the steering,
With his hands and feet, the rowing;
Swam whole days and nights unceasing,
Swam with hope and strength united,
Till at last appeared a cloudlet,
Growing cloudlet to the westward,
Changing to a promontory,
Into land within the ocean.

Swiftly to the shore swam Ahti,
Hastened to a magic castle,
Found therein a hostess baking,
And her daughters kneading barley,
And these words the hero uttered:
“O, thou hostess, filled with kindness,
Couldst thou know my pangs of hunger,
Couldst thou guess my name and station,
Thou wouldst hasten to the storehouse,
Bring me beer and foaming liquor,
Bring the best of thy provisions,
Bring me fish, and veal, and bacon,
Butter, bread, and honeyed biscuits,
Set for me a wholesome dinner,
Wherewithal to still my hunger,
Quench the thirst of Lemminkainen.
Days and nights have I been swimming,
Buffeting the waves of ocean,
Seemed as if the wind protected,
And the billows gave me shelter.”

Then the hostess, filled with kindness,
Hastened to the mountain storehouse,
Cut some butter, veal, and bacon,
Bread, and fish, and honeyed biscuit,
Brought the best of her provisions,
Brought the mead and beer of barley,
Set for him a toothsome dinner,
Wherewithal to still his hunger,
Quench the thirst of Lemminkainen.

When the hero’s feast had ended,
Straightway was a magic vessel
Given by the kindly hostess
To the weary Kaukomieli,
Bark of beauty, new and hardy,
Wherewithal to aid the stranger
In his journey to his home-land,
To the cottage of his mother.

Quickly sailed wild Lemminkainen
On the blue-back of the ocean;
Sailed he days and nights unceasing,
Till at last he reached the borders
Of his own loved home and country;
There beheld he scenes familiar,
Saw the islands, capes, and rivers,
Saw his former shipping-stations,
Saw he many ancient landmarks,
Saw the mountains with their fir-trees,
Saw the pine-trees on the hill-tops,
Saw the willows in the lowlands;
Did not see his father’s cottage,
Nor the dwellings of his mother.
Where a mansion once had risen,
There the alder-trees were growing,
Shrubs were growing on the homestead,
Junipers within the court-yard.
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“In this glen I played and wandered,
On these stones I rocked for ages,
On this lawn I rolled and tumbled,
Frolicked on these woodland-borders,
When a child of little stature.
Where then is my mother’s dwelling,
Where the castles of my father?
Fire, I fear, has found the hamlet,
And the winds dispersed the ashes.”

Then he fell to bitter weeping,
Wept one day and then a second,
Wept the third day without ceasing;
Did not mourn the ancient homestead,
Nor the dwellings of his father;
Wept he for his darling mother,
Wept he for the dear departed,
For the loved ones of the island.

Then he saw the bird of heaven,
Saw an eagle flying near him,
And he asked the bird this question:
“Mighty eagle, bird majestic,
Grant to me the information,
Where my mother may have wandered,
Whither I may go and find her!”

But the eagle knew but little,
Only knew that Ahti’s people
Long ago together perished;
And the raven also answered
That his people had been scattered
By the swords, and spears, and arrows,
Of his enemies from Pohya.
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“Faithful mother, dear departed,
Thou who nursed me in my childhood,
Art thou dead and turned to ashes,
Didst thou perish for my follies,
O’er thy head are willows weeping,
Junipers above thy body,
Alders watching o’er thy slumbers?
This my punishment for evil,
This the recompense of folly!
Fool was I, a son unworthy,
That I measured swords in Northland
With the landlord of Pohyola.
To my tribe came fell destruction,
And the death of my dear mother,
Through my crimes and misdemeanors.”

Then the minstrel looked about him,
Anxious, looked in all directions,
And beheld some gentle foot-prints,
Saw a pathway lightly trodden
Where the heather had been beaten.
Quick as thought the path he followed,
Through the meadows, through the brambles,
O’er the hills, and through the valleys,
To a forest, vast and cheerless;
Travelled far and travelled farther,
Still a greater distance travelled,
To a dense and hidden glenwood,
In the middle of the island;
Found therein a sheltered cabin,
Found a small and darksome dwelling
Built between the rocky ledges,
In the midst of triple pine-trees;
And within he spied his mother,
Found his gray-haired mother weeping.

Lemminkainen loud rejoices,
Cries in tones of joyful greetings,
These the words that Ahti utters:
“Faithful mother, well-beloved,
Thou that gavest me existence,
Happy I, that thou art living,
That thou hast not yet departed
To the kingdom of Tuoni,
To the islands of the blessed,
I had thought that thou hadst perished,
Hadst been murdered by my foemen,
Hadst been slain with bows and arrows.
Heavy are mine eyes from weeping,
And my cheeks are white with sorrow,
Since I thought my mother slaughtered
For the sins I had committed!”
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:
“Long, indeed, hast thou been absent,
Long, my son, hast thou been living
In thy father’s Isle of Refuge,
Roaming on the secret island,
Living at the doors of strangers,
Living in a nameless country,
Refuge from the Northland foemen.”
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:
“Charming is that spot for living,
Beautiful the magic island,
Rainbow-colored was the forest,
Blue the glimmer of the meadows,
Silvered were the pine-tree branches,
Golden were the heather-blossoms;
All the woodlands dripped with honey,
Eggs in every rock and crevice,
Honey flowed from birch and sorb-tree,
Milk in streams from fir and aspen,
Beer-foam dripping from the willows,
Charming there to live and linger,
All their edibles delicious.
This their only source of trouble:
Great the fear for all the maidens,
All the heroes filled with envy,
Feared the coming of the stranger;
Thought that all the island-maidens,
Thought that all the wives and daughters,
All the good, and all the evil,
Gave thy son too much attention;
Thought the stranger, Lemminkainen,
Saw the Island-maids too often;
Yet the virgins I avoided,
Shunned the good and shunned the evil,
Shunned the host of charming daughters,
As the black-wolf shuns the sheep-fold,
As the hawk neglects the chickens.”




RUNE XXX.
THE FROST-FIEND.


Lemminkainen, reckless minstrel,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Hastens as the dawn is breaking,
At the dawning of the morning;,
To the resting-place of vessels,
To the harbor of the island,
Finds the vessels sorely weeping,
Hears the wailing of the rigging,
And the ships intone this chorus:
“Must we wretched lie forever
In the harbor of this island,
Here to dry and fall in pieces?
Ahti wars no more in Northland,
Wars no more for sixty summers,
Even should he thirst for silver,
Should he wish the gold of battle.”

Lemminkainen struck his vessels
With his gloves adorned with copper,
And addressed the ships as follows:
“Mourn no more, my ships of fir-wood,
Strong and hardy is your rigging,
To the wars ye soon may hasten,
Hasten to the seas of battle;
Warriors may swarm your cabins
Ere to-morrow’s morn has risen.”

Then the reckless Lemminkainen
Hastened to his aged mother,
Spake to her the words that follow:
“Weep no longer, faithful mother,
Do not sorrow for thy hero,
Should he leave for scenes of battle,
For the hostile fields of Pohya;
Sweet revenge has fired my spirit,
And my soul is well determined,
To avenge the shameful insult
That the warriors of Northland
Gave to thee, defenseless woman.”

To restrain him seeks his mother,
Warns her son again of danger:
“Do not go, my son beloved,
To the wars in Sariola;
There the jaws of Death await thee,
Fell destruction lies before thee!”

Lemminkainen, little heeding,
Still determined, speaks as follows:
“Where may I secure a swordsman,
Worthy of my race of heroes,
To assist me in the combat?
Often I have heard of Tiera,
Heard of Kura of the islands,
This one I will take to help me,
Magic hero of the broadsword;
He will aid me in the combat,
Will protect me from destruction.”

Then he wandered to the islands,
On the way to Tiera’s hamlet,
These the words that Ahti utters
As he nears the ancient dwellings:
“Dearest friend, my noble Tiera,
My beloved hero-brother,
Dost thou other times remember,
When we fought and bled together,
On the battle-fields of Northland?
There was not an island-village
Where there were not seven mansions,
In each mansion seven heroes,
And not one of all these foemen
Whom we did not slay with broadswords,
Victims of our skill and valor.”

Near the window sat the father
Whittling out a javelin-handle;
Near the threshold sat the mother
Skimming cream and making butter;
Near the portal stood the brother
Working on a sledge of birch-wood;
Near the bridge-pass were the sisters
Washing out their varied garments.

Spake the father from the window,
From the threshold spake the mother,
From the portals spake the brother,
And the sisters from the bridge-pass:
“Tiera has no time for combat,
And his broadsword cannot battle;
Tiera is but late a bridegroom,
Still unveiled his bride awaits him.”

Near the hearth was Tiera lying,
Lying by the fire was Kura,
Hastily one foot was shoeing,
While the other lay in waiting.
From the hook he takes his girdle,
Buckles it around his body,
Takes a javelin from its resting,
Not the largest, nor the smallest,
Buckles on his mighty scabbard,
Dons his heavy mail of copper;
On each javelin pranced a charger,
Wolves were howling from his helmet,
On the rings the bears were growling.
Tiera poised his mighty javelin,
Launched the spear upon its errand;
Hurled the shaft across the pasture,
To the border of the forest,
O’er the clay-fields of Pohyola,
O’er the green and fragrant meadows,
Through the distant hills of Northland.
Then great Tiera touched his javelin
To the mighty spear of Ahti,
Pledged his aid to Lemminkainen,
As his combatant and comrade.
Thereupon wild Kaukomieli
Pushed his boat upon the waters;
Like the serpent through the heather,
Like the creeping of the adder,
Sails the boat away to Pohya,
O’er the seas of Sariola.

Quick the wicked hostess, Louhi,
Sends the black-frost of the heavens
To the waters of Pohyola,
O’er the far-extending sea-plains,
Gave the black-frost these directions:
“Much-loved Frost, my son and hero,
Whom thy mother has instructed,
Hasten whither I may send thee,
Go wherever I command thee,
Freeze the vessel of this hero,
Lemminkainen’s bark of magic,
On the broad back of the ocean,
On the far-extending waters;
Freeze the wizard in his vessel,
Freeze to ice the wicked Ahti,
That he never more may wander,
Never waken while thou livest,
Or at least till I shall free him,
Wake him from his icy slumber!”

Frost, the son of wicked parents,
Hero-son of evil manners,
Hastens off to freeze the ocean,
Goes to fasten down the flood-gates,
Goes to still the ocean-currents.
As he hastens on his journey,
Takes the leaves from all the forest,
Strips the meadows of their verdure,
Robs the flowers of their colors.
When his journey he had ended,
Gained the border of the ocean,
Gained the sea-shore curved and endless,
On the first night of his visit,
Freezes he the lakes and rivers,
Freezes too the shore of ocean,
Freezes not the ocean-billows,
Does not check the ocean-currents.
On the sea a finch is resting,
Bird of song upon the waters,
But his feet are not yet frozen,
Neither is his head endangered.
When the second night Frost lingered,
He began to grow important,
He became a fierce intruder,
Fearless grew in his invasions,
Freezes everything before him;
Sends the fiercest cold of Northland,
Turns to ice the boundless waters.
Ever thicker, thicker, thicker,
Grew the ice on sea and ocean,
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper,
Fell the snow on field and forest,
Froze the hero’s ship of beauty,
Cold and lifeless bark of Ahti;
Sought to freeze wild Lemminkainen,
Freeze him lifeless as his vessel,
Asked the minstrel for his life-blood,
For his ears, and feet, and fingers.

Then the hero, Lemminkainen,
Angry grew and filled with magic,
Hurled the black-frost to the fire-god,
Threw him to the fiery furnace,
Held him in his forge of iron,
Then addressed the frost as follows:
“Frost, thou evil son of Northland,
Dire and only son of Winter,
Let my members not be stiffened,
Neither ears, nor feet, nor fingers,
Neither let my head be frozen.
Thou hast other things to feed on,
Many other heads to stiffen;
Leave in peace the flesh of heroes,
Let this minstrel pass in safety,
Freeze the swamps, and lakes, and rivers,
Fens and forests, hills and valleys;
Let the cold stones grow still colder,
Freeze the willows in the waters,
Let the aspens freeze and suffer,
Let the bark peel from the birch-trees,
Let the pines burst on the mountains,
Let this hero pass in safety,
Do not let his locks be stiffened.

“If all these prove insufficient,
Feed on other worthy matters;
Let the hot stones freeze asunder,
Let the flaming rocks be frozen,
Freeze the fiery blocks of iron,
Freeze to ice the iron mountains;
Stiffen well the mighty Wuoksi,
Let Imatra freeze to silence;
Freeze the sacred stream and whirlpool,
Let their boiling billows stiffen,
Or thine origin I’ll sing thee,
Tell thy lineage of evil.
Well I know thine evil nature,
Know thine origin and power,
Whence thou camest, where thou goest,
Know thine ancestry of evil.
Thou wert born upon the aspen,
Wert conceived upon the willows,
Near the borders of Pohyola,
In the courts of dismal Northland;
Sin-begotten was thy father,
And thy mother was Dishonor.

“While in infancy who fed thee
While thy mother could not nurse thee?
Surely thou wert fed by adders,
Nursed by foul and slimy serpents;
North-winds rocked thee into slumber,
Cradled thee in roughest weather,
In the worst of willow-marshes,
In the springs forever flowing,
Evil-born and evil-nurtured,
Grew to be an evil genius,
Evil was thy mind and spirit,
And the infant still was nameless,
Till the name of Frost was given
To the progeny of evil.

“Then the young lad lived in hedges,
Dwelt among the weeds and willows,
Lived in springs in days of summer,
On the borders of the marshes,
Tore the lindens in the winter,
Stormed among the glens and forests,
Raged among the sacred birch-trees,
Rattled in the alder-branches,
Froze the trees, the shoots, the grasses,
Evened all the plains and prairies,
Ate the leaves within the woodlands,
Made the stalks drop down their blossoms,
Peeled the bark on weeds and willows.

“Thou hast grown to large proportions,
Hast become too tall and mighty;
Dost thou labor to benumb me,
Dost thou wish mine ears and fingers,
Of my feet wouldst thou deprive me?
Do not strive to freeze this hero,
In his anguish and misfortune;
In my stockings I shall kindle
Fire to drive thee from my presence,
In my shoes lay flaming faggots,
Coals of fire in every garment,
Heated sandstones in my rigging;
Thus will hold thee at a distance.
Then thine evil form I’ll banish
To the farthest Northland borders;
When thy journey is completed,
When thy home is reached in safety,
Freeze the caldrons in the castle,
Freeze the coal upon the hearthstone,
In the dough, the hands of women,
On its mother’s lap, the infant,
Freeze the colt beside its mother.

“If thou shouldst not heed this order,
I shall banish thee still farther,
To the carbon-piles of Hisi,
To the chimney-hearth of Lempo,
Hurl thee to his fiery furnace,
Lay thee on the iron anvil,
That thy body may be hammered
With the sledges of the blacksmith,
May be pounded into atoms,
Twixt the anvil and the hammer.

“If thou shouldst not heed this order,
Shouldst not leave me to my freedom,
Know I still another kingdom,
Know another spot of resting;
I shall drive thee to the summer,
Lead thy tongue to warmer climates,
There a prisoner to suffer,
Never to obtain thy freedom
Till thy spirit I deliver,
Till I go myself and free thee.”

Wicked Frost, the son of Winter,
Saw the magic bird of evil
Hovering above his spirit,
Straightway prayed for Ahti’s mercy,
These the words the Frost-fiend uttered:
“Let us now agree together,
Neither one to harm the other,
Never in the course of ages,
Never while the moonlight glimmers
On the snow-capped hills of Northland.
If thou hearest that I bring thee
Cold to freeze thy feet and fingers,
Hurl me to the fiery furnace,
Hammer me upon the anvil
Of the blacksmith, Ilmarinen;
Lead my tongue to warmer climates,
Banish me to lands of summer,
There a prisoner to suffer,
Nevermore to gain my freedom.”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Left his vessel in the ocean,
Frozen in the ice of Northland,
Left his warlike boat forever,
Started on his cheerless journey
To the borders of Pohyola,
And the mighty Tiera followed
In the tracks of his companion.
On the ice they journeyed northward
Briskly walked upon the ice-plain,
Walked one day, and then a second,
Till the closing of the third day,
When the Hunger-land approached them,
When appeared Starvation-island.

Here the hardy Lemminkainen
Hastened forward to the castle,
This the hero’s prayer and question:
“Is there food within this castle,
Fish or fowl within its larders,
To refresh us on our journey,
Mighty heroes, cold and weary?

When the hero, Lemminkainen,
Found no food within the castle,
Neither fish, nor fowl, nor bacon,
Thus he cursed it and departed:
“May the fire destroy these chambers,
May the waters flood this dwelling,
Wash it to the seas of Mana!”

Then they hastened onward, onward,
Hastened on through field and forest,
Over by-ways long untrodden,
Over unknown paths and snow-fields;
Here the hardy Lemminkainen,
Reckless hero, Kaukomieli,
Pulled the soft wool from the ledges,
Gathered lichens from the tree-trunks,
Wove them into magic stockings,
Wove them into shoes and mittens,
On the settles of the hoar-frost,
In the stinging cold of Northland.

Then he sought to find some pathway,
That would guide their wayward footsteps,
And the hero spake as follows:
“O thou Tiera, friend beloved,
Shall we reach our destination,
Wandering for days together,
Through these Northland fields and forests?”
Kura thus replies to Ahti:
“We, alas! have come for vengeance,
Come for blood and retribution,
To the battle-fields of Northland,
To the dismal Sariola,
Here to leave our souls and bodies,
Here to starve, and freeze, and perish,
In the dreariest of places,
In this sun-forsaken country!
Never shall we gain the knowledge,
Never learn it, never tell it,
Which the pathway that can guide us
To the forest-beds to suffer,
To the Pohya-plains to perish,
In the home-land of the ravens,
Fitting food for crows and eagles.
Often do the Northland vultures
Hither come to feed their fledgelings;
Hither bring the birds of heaven
Bits of flesh and blood of heroes;
Often do the beaks of ravens
Tear the flesh of kindred corpses,
Often do the eagle’s talons
Carry bones and trembling vitals,
Such as ours, to feed their nestlings,
In their rocky homes and ledges.

“Oh! my mother can but wonder,
Never can divine the answer,
Where her reckless son is roaming,
Where her hero’s blood is flowing,
Whether in the swamps and lowlands,
Whether in the heat of battle,
Or upon the waves of the ocean,
Or upon the hop-field mountains,
Or along some forest by-way.
Nothing can her mind discover
Of the frailest of her heroes,
Only think that he has perished.
Thus the hoary-headed mother
Weeps and murmurs in her chambers:
‘Where is now my son beloved,
In the kingdom of Manala?
Sow thy crops, thou dread Tuoni,
Harrow well the fields of Kalma!
Now the bow receives its respite
From the fingers of my Tiera;
Bow and arrow now are useless,
Now the merry birds can fatten
In the fields, and fens, and forests;
Bears may live in dens of freedom,
On the fields may sport the elk-herds.’”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Thus it is, mine aged mother,
Thou that gavest me existence!
Thou hast reared thy broods of chickens,
Hatched and reared thy flights of white-swans,
All of them the winds have scattered,
Or the evil Lempo frightened;
One flew hither, and one thither,
And a third one, lost forever!
Think thou of our former pleasures,
Of our better days together,
When I wandered like the flowers,
Like the berry in the meadows.
Many saw my form majestic,
Many thought me well-proportioned.
Now is not as then with Ahti,
Into evil days have fallen,
Since I see but storms and darkness!
Then my eyes beheld but sunshine,
Then we did not weep and murmur,
Did not fill our hearts with sorrow,
When the maids in joy were singing,
When the virgins twined their tresses;
Then the women joined in joyance,
Whether brides were happy-wedded,
Whether bridegrooms choose discreetly,
Whether they were wise or unwise.

“But we must not grow disheartened,
Let the Island-maidens cheer us;
Here we are not yet enchanted,
Not bewitched by magic singing,
On the paths not left to perish,
Sink and perish on our journey.
Full of youth we should not suffer,
Strong, we should not die unworthy,
Whom the wizards have enchanted,
Have bewitched with songs of magic;
Sorcerers may charm and conquer,
Bury them within their dungeons,
Hide them spell-bound in their cabins.
Let the wizards charm each other,
And bewitch their magic offspring,
Bring their tribes to fell destruction.
Never did my gray-haired father
Bow submission to a wizard,
Offer worship to magicians.
These the words my father uttered,
These the thoughts his son advances:
‘Guard us, thou O great Creator,
Shield us, thou O God of mercy,
With thine arms of grace protect us,
Help us with thy strength and wisdom,
Guide the minds of all thy heroes,
Keep aright the thoughts of women,
Keep the old from speaking evil,
Keep the young from sin and folly,
Be to us a help forever,
Be our Guardian and our Father,
That our children may not wander
From the ways of their Creator,
From the path that God has given!’”

Then the hero Lemminkainen,
Made from cares the fleetest racers,
Sable racers from his sorrows,
Reins he made from days of evil,
From his sacred pains made saddles.
To the saddle, quickly springing,
Galloped he away from trouble,
To his dear and aged mother;
And his comrade, faithful Tiera,
Galloped to his Island-dwelling.

Now departs wild Lemminkainen,
Brave and reckless Kaukomieli,
From these ancient songs and legends;
Only guides his faithful Kura
To his waiting bride and kindred,
While these lays and incantations
Shall be turned to other heroes.




RUNE XXXI.
KULLERWOINEN SON OF EVIL.


In the ancient times a mother
Hatched and raised some swans and chickens,
Placed the chickens in the brushwood,
Placed her swans upon the river;
Came an eagle, hawk, and falcon,
Scattered all her swans and chickens,
One was carried to Karyala,
And a second into Ehstland,
Left a third at home in Pohya.
And the one to Ehstland taken
Soon became a thriving merchant;
He that journeyed to Karyala
Flourished and was called Kalervo;
He that hid away in Pohya
Took the name of Untamoinen,
Flourished to his father’s sorrow,
To the heart-pain of his mother.

Untamoinen sets his fish-nets
In the waters of Kalervo;
Kullerwoinen sees the fish-nets,
Takes the fish home in his basket.
Then Untamo, evil-minded,
Angry grew and sighed for vengeance,
Clutched his fingers for the combat,
Bared his mighty arms for battle,
For the stealing of his salmon,
For the robbing of his fish-nets.
Long they battled, fierce the struggle,
Neither one could prove the victor;
Should one beat the other fiercely,
He himself was fiercely beaten.

Then arose a second trouble;
On the second and the third days,
Kalerwoinen sowed some barley
Near the barns of Untamoinen;
Untamoinen’s sheep in hunger
Ate the crop of Kullerwoinen;
Kullerwoinen’s dog in malice
Tore Untamo’s sheep in pieces;
Then Untamo sorely threatened
To annihilate the people
Of his brother, Kalerwoinen,
To exterminate his tribe-folk,
To destroy the young and aged,
To out-root his race and kingdom;
Conjures men with broadswords girded,
For the war he fashions heroes,
Fashions youth with spears adjusted,
Bearing axes on their shoulders;
Conjures thus a mighty army,
Hastens to begin a battle,
Bring a war upon his brother.

Kalerwoinen’s wife in beauty
Sat beside her chamber-window,
Looking out along the highway,
Spake these words in wonder guessing:
“Do I see some smoke arising,
Or perchance a heavy storm-cloud,
Near the border of the forest,
Near the ending of the prairie?”

It was not some smoke arising,
Nor indeed a heavy storm-cloud,
It was Untamoinen’s soldiers
Marching to the place of battle.
Warriors of Untamoinen
Came equipped with spears and arrows,
Killed the people of Kalervo,
Slew his tribe and all his kindred,
Burned to ashes many dwellings,
Levelled many courts and cabins,
Only left Kalervo’s daughter,
With her unborn child, survivors
Of the slaughter of Untamo;
And she led the hostile army
To her father’s halls and mansion,
Swept the rooms and made them cheery,
Gave the heroes home-attentions.

Time had gone but little distance,
Ere a boy was born in magic
Of the virgin, Untamala,
Of a mother, trouble-laden,
Him the mother named Kullervo,
“Pearl of Combat,” said Untamo.
Then they laid the child of wonder,
Fatherless, the magic infant,
In the cradle of attention,
To be rocked, and fed, and guarded;
But he rocked himself at pleasure,
Rocked until his locks stood endwise;
Rocked one day, and then a second,
Rocked the third from morn till noontide;
But before the third day ended,
Kicks the boy with might of magic,
Forwards, backwards, upwards, downwards,
Kicks in miracles of power,
Bursts with might his swaddling garments;
Creeping from beneath his blankets,
Knocks his cradle into fragments,
Tears to tatters all his raiment,
Seemed that he would grow a hero,
And his mother, Untamala,
Thought that he, when full of stature,
When he found his strength and reason,
Would become a great magician,
First among a thousand heroes.

When three months the boy had thriven,
He began to speak as follows:
“When my form is full of stature,
When these arms grow strong and hardy,
Then will I avenge the murder
Of Kalervo and his people!”

Untamoinen hears the saying,
Speaks these words to those about him:
“To my tribe he brings destruction,
In him grows a new Kalervo!”

Then the heroes well considered,
And the women gave their counsel,
How to kill the magic infant,
That their tribe may live in safety.
It appeared the boy would prosper;
Finally, they all consenting,
He was placed within a basket,
And with willows firmly fastened,
Taken to the reeds and rushes,
Lowered to the deepest waters,
In his basket there to perish.

When three nights had circled over,
Messengers of Untamoinen
Went to see if he had perished
In his basket in the waters;
But the prodigy was living,
Had not perished in the rushes;
He had left his willow-basket,
Sat in triumph on a billow,
In his hand a rod of copper,
On the rod a golden fish-line,
Fishing for the silver whiting,
Measuring the deeps beneath him;
In the sea was little water,
Scarcely would it fill three measures.

Untamoinen then reflected,
This the language of the wizard:
“Whither shall we take this wonder,
Lay this prodigy of evil,
That destruction may o’ertake him,
Where the boy will sink and perish?”

Then his messengers he ordered
To collect dried poles of brushwood,
Birch-trees with their hundred branches,
Pine-trees full of pitch and resin,
Ordered that a pyre be builded,
That the boy might be cremated,
That Kullervo thus might perish.
High they piled the arid branches,
Dried limbs from the sacred birch-tree,
Branches from a hundred fir-trees,
Knots and branches full of resign;
Filled with bark a thousand sledges,
Seasoned oak, a hundred measures;
Piled the brushwood to the tree-tops,
Set the boy upon the summit,
Set on fire the pile of brushwood,
Burned one day, and then a second,
Burned the third from morn till evening.

When Untamo sent his heralds
To inspect the pyre and wizard,
There to learn if young Kullervo
Had been burned to dust and ashes,
There they saw the young boy sitting
On a pyramid of embers,
In his hand a rod of copper,
Raking coals of fire about him,
To increase their heat and power;
Not a hair was burned nor injured,
Not a ringlet singed nor shrivelled.

Then Untamo, evil-humored,
Thus addressed his trusted heralds:
“Whither shall the boy be taken,
To what place this thing of evil,
That destruction may o’ertake him.
That the boy may sink and perish?”

Then they hung him to an oak-tree,
Crucified him in the branches,
That the wizard there might perish.

When three days and nights had ended,
Untamoinen spake as follows:
“It is time to send my heralds
To inspect the mighty oak-tree,
There to learn if young Kullervo
Lives or dies among the branches.”

Thereupon he sent his servants,
And the heralds brought this message:
“Young Kullervo has not perished,
Has not died among the branches
Of the oak-tree where we hung him.
In the oak he maketh pictures
With a wand between his fingers;
Pictures hang from all the branches,
Carved and painted by Kullervo;
And the heroes, thick as acorns,
With their swords and spears adjusted,
Fill the branches of the oak-tree,
Every leaf becomes a soldier.”

Who can help the grave Untamo
Kill the boy that threatens evil
To Untamo’s tribe and country,
Since he will not die by water,
Nor by fire, nor crucifixion?
Finally it was decided
That his body was immortal,
Could not suffer death nor torture.

In despair grave Untamoinen
Thus addressed the boy, Kullervo:
“Wilt thou live a life becoming,
Always do my people honor,
Should I keep thee in my dwelling?
Shouldst thou render servant’s duty,
Then thou wilt receive thy wages,
Reaping whatsoe’er thou sowest;
Thou canst wear the golden girdle,
Or endure the tongue of censure.”

When the boy had grown a little,
Had increased in strength and stature,
He was given occupation,
He was made to tend an infant,
Made to rock the infant’s cradle.
These the words of Untamoinen:
“Often look upon the young child,
Feed him well and guard from danger,
Wash his linen in the river,
Give the infant good attention.”

Young Kullervo, wicked wizard,
Nurses one day then a second;
On the morning of the third day,
Gives the infant cruel treatment,
Blinds its eyes and breaks its fingers;
And when evening shadows gather,
Kills the young child while it slumbers,
Throws its body to the waters,
Breaks and burns the infant’s cradle.
Untamoinen thus reflected:
“Never will this fell Kullervo
Be a worthy nurse for children,
Cannot rock a babe in safety;
Do not know how I can use him,
What employment I can give him!”

Then he told the young magician
He must fell the standing forest,
And Kullervo gave this answer:
“Only will I be a hero,
When I wield the magic hatchet;
I am young, and fair, and mighty,
Far more beautiful than others,
Have the skill of six magicians.”

Thereupon he sought the blacksmith,
This the order of Kullervo:
“Listen, O thou metal-artist,
Forge for me an axe of copper,
Forge the mighty axe of heroes,
Wherewith I may fell the forest,
Fell the birch, and oak, and aspen.”

This behest the blacksmith honors,
Forges him an axe of copper,
Wonderful the blade he forges.
Kullerwoinen grinds his hatchet,
Grinds his blade from morn till evening,
And the next day makes the handle;
Then he hastens to the forest,
To the upward-sloping mountain,
To the tallest of the birches,
To the mightiest of oak-trees;
There he swings his axe of copper,
Swings his blade with might of magic,
Cuts with sharpened edge the aspen,
With one blow he fells the oak-tree,
With a second blow, the linden;
Many trees have quickly fallen,
By the hatchet of Kullervo.
Then the wizard spake as follows:
“This the proper work of Lempo,
Let dire Hisi fell the forest!”

In the birch he sank his hatchet,
Made an uproar in the woodlands,
Called aloud in tones of thunder,
Whistled to the distant mountains,
Till they echoed to his calling,
When Kullervo spake as follows:
“May the forest, in the circle
Where my voice rings, fall and perish,
In the earth be lost forever!
May no tree remain unlevelled,
May no saplings grow in spring-time,
Never while the moonlight glimmers,
Where Kullervo’s voice has echoed,
Where the forest hears my calling;
Where the ground with seed is planted,
And the grain shall sprout and flourish,
May it never come to ripeness,
May the ears of corn be blasted!”

When the strong man, Untamoinen,
Went to look at early evening,
How Kullervo was progressing,
In his labors in the forest;
Little was the work accomplished,
Was not worthy of a hero;
Untamoinen thus reflected:
“Young Kullervo is not fitted
For the work of clearing forests,
Wastes the best of all the timber,
To my lands he brings destruction;
I shall set him making fences.”

Then the youth began the building
Of a fence for Untamoinen;
Took the trunks of stately fir-trees,
Trimmed them with his blade for fence-posts,
Cut the tallest in the woodlands,
For the railing of his fences;
Made the smaller poles and cross-bars
From the longest of the lindens;
Made the fence without a pass-way,
Made no wicket in his fences,
And Kullervo spake these measures:
“He that does not rise as eagles,
Does not sail on wings through ether,
Cannot cross Kullervo’s pickets,
Nor the fences he has builded.”

Untamoinen left his mansion
To inspect the young boy’s labors,
View the fences of Kullervo;
Saw the fence without a pass-way,
Not a wicket in his fences;
From the earth the fence extended
To the highest clouds of heaven.
These the words of Untamoinen:
“For this work he is not fitted,
Useless is the fence thus builded;
Is so high that none can cross it,
And there is no passage through it:
He shall thresh the rye and barley.”

Young Kullervo, quick preparing,
Made an oaken flail for threshing,
Threshed the rye to finest powder,
Threshed the barley into atoms,
And the straw to worthless fragments.

Untamoinen went at evening,
Went to see Kullervo’s threshing,
View the work of Kullerwoinen;
Found the rye was ground to powder,
Grains of barley crushed to atoms,
And the straw to worthless rubbish.

Untamoinen then grew angry,
Spake these words in bitter accents:
“Kullerwoinen as a workman
Is a miserable failure;
Whatsoever work he touches
Is but ruined by his witchcraft;
I shall carry him to Ehstland,
In Karyala I shall sell him
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
There to swing the heavy hammer.”

Untamoinen sells Kullervo,
Trades him off in far Karyala,
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
To the master of the metals,
This the sum received in payment:
Seven worn and worthless sickles,
Three old caldrons worse than useless,
Three old scythes, and hoes, and axes,
Recompense, indeed, sufficient
For a boy that will not labor
For the good of his employer.




RUNE XXXII.
KULLERVO AS A SHEPHERD.


Kullerwoinen, wizard-servant
Of the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Purchased slave from Untamoinen,
Magic son with sky-blue stockings,
With a head of golden ringlets,
In his shoes of marten-leather,
Waiting little, asked the blacksmith,
Asked the host for work at morning,
In the evening asked the hostess,
These the words of Kullerwoinen:
“Give me work at early morning,
In the evening, occupation,
Labor worthy of thy servant.”

Then the wife of Ilmarinen,
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Thinking long, and long debating,
How to give the youth employment,
How the purchased slave could labor;
Finally a shepherd made him,
Made him keeper of her pastures;
But the over-scornful hostess,
Baked a biscuit for the herdsman,
Baked a loaf of wondrous thickness,
Baked the lower-half of oat-meal,
And the upper-half of barley,
Baked a flint-stone in the centre,
Poured around it liquid butter,
Then she gave it to the shepherd,
Food to still the herdsman’s hunger;
Thus she gave the youth instructions:
“Do not eat the bread in hunger,
Till the herd is in the woodlands!”

Then the wife of Ilmarinen
Sent her cattle to the pasture,
Thus addressing Kullerwoinen:
“Drive the cows to yonder bowers,
To the birch-trees and the aspens,
That they there may feed and fatten,
Fill themselves with milk and butter,
In the open forest-pastures,
On the distant hills and mountains,
In the glens among the birch-trees,
In the lowlands with the aspens,
In the golden pine-tree forests,
In the thickets silver-laden.

“Guard them, thou O kind Creator,
Shield them, omnipresent Ukko,
Shelter them from every danger,
And protect them from all evil,
That they may not want, nor wander
From the paths of peace and plenty.
As at home Thou didst protect them
In the shelters and the hurdles,
Guard them now beneath the heavens,
Shelter them in woodland pastures,
That the herds may live and prosper
To the joy of Northland’s hostess,
And against the will of Lempo.

“If my herdsman prove unworthy,
If the shepherd-maids seem evil,
Let the pastures be their shepherds,
Let the alders guard the cattle,
Make the birch-tree their protector,
Let the willow drive them homeward,
Ere the hostess go to seek them,
Ere the milkmaids wait and worry.
Should the birch-tree not protect them,
Nor the aspen lend assistance,
Nor the linden be their keeper,
Nor the willow drive them homeward,
Wilt thou give them better herdsmen,
Let Creation’s beauteous daughters
Be their kindly shepherdesses.
Thou hast many lovely maidens,
Many hundreds that obey thee,
In the Ether’s spacious circles,
Beauteous daughters of creation.

“Summer-daughter, magic maiden,
Southern mother of the woodlands,
Pine-tree daughter, Kateyatar,
Pihlayatar, of the aspen,
Alder-maiden, Tapio’s daughter,
Daughter of the glen, Millikki,
And the mountain-maid, Tellervo,
Of my herds be ye protectors,
Keep them from the evil-minded,
Keep them safe in days of summer,
In the times of fragrant flowers,
While the tender leaves are whispering,
While the Earth is verdure-laden.

“Summer-daughter, charming maiden,
Southern mother of the woodlands,
Spread abroad thy robes of safety,
Spread thine apron o’er the forest,
Let it cover all my cattle,
And protect the unprotected,
That no evil winds may harm them,
May not suffer from the storm-clouds.
Guard my flocks from every danger,
Keep them from the hands of wild-beasts,
From the swamps with sinking pathways,
From the springs that bubble trouble,
From the swiftly running waters,
From the bottom of the whirlpool,
That they may not find misfortune,
May not wander to destruction,
In the marshes sink and perish,
Though against God’s best intentions,
Though against the will of Ukko.

“From a distance bring a bugle,
Bring a shepherd’s horn from heaven,
Bring the honey-flute of Ukko,
Play the music of creation,
Blow the pipes of the magician,
Play the flowers on the highlands,
Charm the hills, and dales, and mountains,
Charm the borders of the forest,
Fill the forest-trees with honey,
Fill with spice the fountain-borders.

“For my herds give food and shelter,
Feed them all on honeyed pastures,
Give them drink at honeyed fountains
Feed them on thy golden grasses,
On the leaves of silver saplings,
From the springs of life and beauty,
From the crystal-waters flowing,
From the waterfalls of Rutya,
From the uplands green and golden,
From the glens enriched in silver.
Dig thou also golden fountains
On the four sides of the willow,
That the cows may drink in sweetness,
And their udders swell with honey,
That their milk may flow in streamlets;
Let the milk be caught in vessels,
Let the cow’s gift be not wasted,
Be not given to Manala.

“Many are the sons of evil,
That to Mana take their milkings,
Give their milk to evil-doers,
Waste it in Tuoni’s empire;
Few there are, and they the worthy,
That can get the milk from Mana;
Never did my ancient mother
Ask for counsel in the village,
Never in the courts for wisdom;
She obtained her milk from Mana,
Took the sour-milk from the dealers,
Sweet-milk from the greater distance,
From the kingdom of Manala,
From Tuoni’s fields and pastures;
Brought it in the dusk of evening,
Through the by-ways in the darkness,
That the wicked should not know it,
That it should not find destruction.

“This the language of my mother,
And these words I also echo:
‘Whither does the cow’s gift wander,
Whither has the milk departed?
Has it gone to feed the strangers,
Banished to the distant village,
Gone to feed the hamlet-lover,
Or perchance to feed the forest,
Disappeared within the woodlands,
Scattered o’er the hills and mountains,
Mingled with the lakes and rivers?
It shall never go to Mana,
Never go to feed the stranger,
Never to the village-lover;
Neither shall it feed the forest,
Nor be lost upon the mountains,
Neither sprinkled in the woodlands,
Nor be mingled with the waters;
It is needed for our tables,
Worthy food for all our children.’

“Summer-daughter, maid of beauty,
Southern daughter of Creation,
Give Suotikki tender fodder,
To Watikki, give pure water,
To Hermikki milk abundant,
Fresh provisions to Tuorikki,
From Mairikki let the milk flow,
Fresh milk from my cows in plenty,
Coming from the tips of grasses,
From the tender herbs and leaflets,
From the meadows rich in honey,
From the mother of the forest,
From the meadows sweetly dripping,
From the berry-laden branches,
From the heath of flower-maidens,
From the verdure-maiden bowers,
From the clouds of milk-providers,
From the virgin of the heavens,
That the milk may flow abundant
From the cows that I have given
To the keeping of Kullervo.

“Rise thou virgin of the valley,
From the springs arise in beauty,
Rise thou maiden of the fountain,
Beautiful, arise in ether,
Take the waters from the cloudlets,
And my roaming herds besprinkle,
That my cows may drink and flourish,
May be ready for the coming
Of the shepherdess of evening.

“O Millikki, forest-hostess,
Mother of the herds at pasture,
Send the tallest of thy servants,
Send the best of thine assistants,
That my herds may well be guarded,
Through the pleasant days of summer,
Given us by our Creator.

“Beauteous virgin of the woodlands,
Tapio’s most charming daughter,
Fair Tellervo, forest-maiden,
Softly clad in silken raiment,
Beautiful in golden ringlets,
Do thou give my herds protection,
In the Metsola dominions,
On the hills of Tapiola;
Shield them with thy hands of beauty,
Stroke them gently with thy fingers,
Give to them a golden lustre,
Make them shine like fins of salmon,
Grow them robes as soft as ermine.

“When the evening star brings darkness,
When appears the hour of twilight,
Send my lowing cattle homeward,
Milk within their vessels coursing,
Water on their backs in lakelets.
When the Sun has set in ocean,
When the evening-bird is singing,
Thus address my herds of cattle:

“Ye that carry horns, now hasten
To the sheds of Ilmarinen;
Ye enriched in milk go homeward,
To the hostess now in waiting,
Home, the better place for sleeping,
Forest-beds are full of danger;
When the evening comes in darkness,
Straightway journey to the milkmaids
Building fires to light the pathway
On the turf enriched in honey,
In the pastures berry-laden!

“Thou, O Tapio’s son, Nyrikki,
Forest-son, enrobed in purple,
Cut the fir-trees on the mountains,
Cut the pines with cones of beauty,
Lay them o’er the streams for bridges,
Cover well the sloughs of quicksand,
In the swamps and in the lowlands,
That my herd may pass in safety,
On their long and dismal journey,
To the clouds of smoke may hasten,
Where the milkmaids wait their coming.
If the cows heed not this order,
Do not hasten home at evening,
Then, O service-berry maiden,
Cut a birch-rod from the glenwood,
From the juniper, a whip-stick,
Near to Tapio’s spacious mansion,
Standing on the ash-tree mountain,
Drive my wayward, lowing cattle,
Into Metsola’s wide milk-yards,
When the evening-star is rising.

“Thou, O Otso, forest-apple,
Woodland bear, with honeyed fingers,
Let us make a lasting treaty,
Make a vow for future ages,
That thou wilt not kill my cattle,
Wilt not eat my milk-providers;
That I will not send my hunters
To destroy thee and thy kindred,
Never in the days of summer,
The Creator’s warmest season.

“Dost thou hear the tones of cow-bells,
Hear the calling of the bugles,
Hide thyself within the meadow,
Sink upon the turf in slumber,
Bury both thine ears in clover,
Crouch within some alder-thicket
Climb between the mossy ledges,
Visit thou some rocky cavern,
Flee away to other mountains,
Till thou canst not hear the cow-bells,
Nor the calling of the herdsmen.

“Listen, Otso of the woodlands,
Sacred bear with honeyed fingers,
To approach the herd of cattle
Thou thyself art not forbidden,
But thy tongue, and teeth, and fingers,
Must not touch my herd in summer,
Must not harm my harmless creatures.
Go around the scented meadows,
Amble through the milky pastures,
From the tones of bells and shepherds.
Should the herd be on the mountain,
Go thou quickly to the marshes;
Should my cattle browse the lowlands,
Sleep thou then within the thicket;
Should they feed upon the uplands,
Thou must hasten to the valley;
Should the herd graze at the bottom,
Thou must feed upon the summit.

“Wander like the golden cuckoo,
Like the dove of silver brightness,
Like a little fish in ocean;
Hide thy claws within thy hair-foot,
Shut thy wicked teeth in darkness,
That my herd may not be frightened,
May not think themselves in danger.
Leave my cows in peace and plenty,
Let them journey home in order,
Through the vales and mountain by-ways,
Over plains and through the forest,
Harming not my harmless creatures.

“Call to mind our former pledges,
At the river of Tuoni,
Near the waterfall and whirlpool,
In the ears of our Creator.
Thrice to Otso was it granted,
In the circuit of the summer,
To approach the land of cow-bells,
Where the herdsmen’s voices echo;
But to thee it was not granted,
Otso never had permission
To attempt a wicked action,
To begin a work of evil.
Should the blinding thing of malice
Come upon thee in thy roamings,
Should thy bloody teeth feel hunger,
Throw thy malice to the mountains,
And thy hunger to the pine-trees,
Sink thy teeth within the aspens,
In the dead limbs of the birches,
Prune the dry stalks from the willows.
Should thy hunger still impel thee,
Go thou to the berry-mountain,
Eat the fungus of the forest,
Feed thy hunger on the ant-hills,
Eat the red roots of the bear-tree,
Metsola’s rich cakes of honey,
Not the grass my herd would feed on.
Or if Metsola’s rich honey
Should ferment before the eating,
On the hills of golden color,
On the mountains filled with silver,
There is other food for hunger,
Other drink for thirsting Otso,
Everlasting will the food be,
And the drink be never wanting.

“Let us now agree in honor,
And conclude a lasting treaty
That our lives may end in pleasure,
May be merry in the summer,
Both enjoy the woods in common,
Though our food must be distinctive.
Shouldst thou still desire to fight me,
Let our contests be in winter,
Let our wars be on the snow-fields.
Swamps will thaw in days of summer,
Warm, the water in the rivers.
Therefore shouldst thou break this treaty,
Shouldst thou come where golden cattle
Roam these woodland hills and valleys,
We will slay thee with our cross-bows;
Should our arrow-men be absent,
We have here some archer-women,
And among them is the hostess,
That can use the fatal weapon,
That can bring thee to destruction,
Thus will end the days of trouble
That thou bringest to our people,
And against the will of Ukko.

“Ukko, ruler in the heavens,
Lend an ear to my entreaty,
Metamorphose all my cattle,
Through the mighty force of magic,
Into stumps and stones convert them,
If the enemy should wander,
Near my herd in days of summer.

“If I had been born an Otso,
I would never stride and amble
At the feet of aged women;
Elsewhere there are hills and valleys,
Farther on are honey-pastures,
Where the lazy bear may wander,
Where the indolent may linger;
Sneak away to yonder mountain,
That thy tender flesh may lessen,
In the blue-glen’s deep recesses,
In the bear-dens of the forest.
Thou canst move through fields of acorns,
Through the sand and ocean-pebbles,
There for thee is tracked a pathway,
Through the woodlands on the sea-coast,
To the Northland’s farthest limits,
To the dismal plains of Lapland,
There ’tis well for thee to lumber,
There to live will be a pleasure.
Shoeless there to walk in summer,
Stockingless in days of autumn,
On the blue-back of the mountain,
Through the swamps and fertile lowlands.

“If thou canst not journey thither,
Canst not find the Lapland-highway,
Hasten on a little distance,
In the bear-path leading northward.
To the grove of Tuonela,
To the honey-plains of Kalma,
Swamps there are in which to wander,
Heaths in which to roam at pleasure,
There are Kiryos, there are Karyos,
And of beasts a countless number,
With their fetters strong as iron,
Fattening within the forest.
Be ye gracious, groves and mountains,
Full of grace, ye darksome thickets,
Peace and plenty to my cattle,
Through the pleasant days of summer,
The Creator’s warmest season.

“Knippana, O King of forests,
Thou the gray-beard of the woodlands,
Watch thy dogs in fen and fallow,
Lay a sponge within one nostril,
And an acorn in the other,
That they may not scent my cattle;
Tie their eyes with silken fillets,
That they may not see my herdlings,
May not see my cattle grazing.

“Should all this seem inefficient,
Drive away thy barking children,
Let them run to other forests,
Let them hunt in other marshes,
From these verdant strips of meadow,
From these far outstretching borders,
Hide thy dogs within thy caverns,
Firmly tie thy yelping children,
Tie them with thy golden fetters,
With thy chains adorned with silver,
That they may not do me damage,
May not do a deed of mischief.

“Should all this prove inefficient,
Thou, O Ukko, King of heaven,
Wise director, full of mercy,
Hear the golden words I utter,
Hear a voice that breathes affection,
From the alder make a muzzle,
For each dog within the kennel;
Should the alder prove too feeble,
Cast a band of purest copper;
Should the copper prove a failure,
Forge a band of ductile iron;
Should the iron snap asunder,
In each nose a small-ring fasten,
Made of molten gold and silver,
Chain thy dogs in forest-caverns,
That my herd may not be injured.”

Then the wife of Ilmarinen,
Life-companion of the blacksmith,
Opened all her yards and stables,
Led her herd across the meadow,
Placed them in the herdman’s keeping,
In the care of Kullerwoinen.




RUNE XXXIII.
KULLERVO AND THE CHEAT-CAKE.


Thereupon the lad, Kullervo,
Laid his luncheon in his basket,
Drove the herd to mountain-pastures,
O’er the hills and through the marshes,
To their grazings in the woodlands,
Speaking as he careless wandered:
“Of the youth am I the poorest,
Hapless lad and full of trouble,
Evil luck to me befallen!
I, alas! must idly wander
O’er the hills and through the valleys,
As a watch-dog for the cattle!”

Then she sat upon the greensward,
In a sunny spot selected,
Singing, chanting words as follow:
“Shine, O shine, thou Sun of heaven,
Cast thy rays, thou fire of Ukko,
On the herdsman of the blacksmith,
On the head of Kullerwoinen,
On this poor and luckless shepherd,
Not in Ilmarinen’s smithy,
Nor the dwellings of his people;
Good the table of the hostess,
Cuts the best of wheaten biscuit,
Honey-cakes she cuts in slices,
Spreading each with golden butter;
Only dry bread has the herdsman,
Eats with pain the oaten bread-crusts,
Filled with chaff his and biscuit,
Feeds upon the worst of straw-bread,
Pine-tree bark, the broad he feeds on,
Sipping water from the birch-bark,
Drinking from the tips of grasses!
Go, O Sun, and go, O barley,
Haste away, thou light of Ukko,
Hide within the mountain pine-trees,
Go, O wheat, to yonder thickets,
To the trees of purple berries,
To the junipers and alders,
Safely lead the herdsman homeward
To the biscuit golden-buttered,
To the honeyed cakes and viands!”

While the shepherd lad was singing
Kullerwoinen’s song and echo,
Ilmarinen’s wife was feasting
On the sweetest bread of Northland,
On the toothsome cakes of barley,
On the richest of provisions;
Only laid aside some cabbage,
For the herdsman, Kullerwoinen;
Set apart some wasted fragments,
Leavings of the dogs at dinner,
For the shepherd, home returning.

From the woods a bird came flying,
Sang this song to Kullerwoinen:
“’Tis the time for forest-dinners,
For the fatherless companion
Of the herds to eat his viands,
Eat the good things from his basket!”

Kullerwoinen heard the songster,
Looked upon the Sun’s long shadow,
Straightway spake the words that follow:
“True, the singing of the song-bird,
It is time indeed for feasting,
Time to eat my basket-dinner.”

Thereupon young Kullerwoinen
Called his herd to rest in safety,
Sat upon a grassy hillock,
Took his basket from his shoulders,
Took therefrom the arid oat-loaf,
Turned it over in his fingers,
Carefully the loaf inspected,
Spake these words of ancient wisdom:
“Many loaves are fine to look on,
On the outside seem delicious,
On the inside, chaff and tan-bark!”

Then the shepherd, Kullerwoinen,
Drew his knife to cut his oat-loaf,
Cut the hard and arid biscuit;
Cuts against a stone imprisoned,
Well imbedded in the centre,
Breaks his ancient knife in pieces;
When the shepherd youth, Kullervo,
Saw his magic knife had broken,
Weeping sore, he spake as follows:
“This, the blade that I hold sacred,
This the one thing that I honor,
Relic of my mother’s people!
On the stone within this oat-loaf,
On this cheat-cake of the hostess,
I my precious knife have broken.
How shall I repay this insult,
How avenge this woman’s malice,
What the wages for deception?”
From a tree the raven answered:
“O thou little silver buckle,
Only son of old Kalervo,
Why art thou in evil humor,
Wherefore sad in thy demeanor?
Take a young shoot from the thicket,
Take a birch-rod from the valley,
Drive thy herd across the lowlands,
Through the quicksands of the marshes;
To the wolves let one half wander,
To the bear-dens, lead the other;
Sing the forest wolves together,
Sing the bears down from the mountains,
Call the wolves thy little children,
And the bears thy standard-bearers;
Drive them like a cow-herd homeward,
Drive them home like spotted cattle,
Drive them to thy master’s milk-yards;
Thus thou wilt repay the hostess
For her malice and derision.”

Thereupon the wizard answered,
These the words of Kullerwoinen:
“Wait, yea wait, thou bride of Hisi!
Do I mourn my mother’s relic,
Mourn the keep-sake thou hast broken?
Thou thyself shalt mourn as sorely
When thy cows come home at evening!”

From the tree he cuts a birch-wand,
From the juniper a whip-stick,
Drives the herd across the lowlands,
Through the quicksands of the marshes,
To the wolves lets one half wander,
To the bear-dens leads the other;
Calls the wolves his little children,
Calls the bears his standard-bearers,
Changes all his herd of cattle
Into wolves and bears by magic.

In the west the Sun is shining,
Telling that the night is coming.
Quick the wizard, Kullerwoinen,
Wanders o’er the pine-tree mountain,
Hastens through the forest homeward,
Drives the wolves and bears before him
Toward the milk-yards of the hostess;
To the herd he speaks as follows,
As they journey on together:
“Tear and kill the wicked hostess,
Tear her guilty flesh in pieces,
When she comes to view her cattle,
When she stoops to do her milking!”

Then the wizard, Kullerwoinen,
From an ox-bone makes a bugle,
Makes it from Tuonikki’s cow-horn,
Makes a flute from Kiryo’s shin-bone,
Plays a song upon his bugle,
Plays upon his flute of magic,
Thrice upon the home-land hill-tops,
Six times near the coming gate-ways.

Ilmarinen’s wife and hostess
Long had waited for the coming
Of her herd with Kullerwoinen,
Waited for the milk at evening,
Waited for the new-made butter,
Heard the footsteps in the cow-path,
On the heath she beard the bustle,
Spake these joyous words of welcome:
“Be thou praised, O gracious Ukko,
That my herd is home returning!
But I hear a bugle sounding,
’Tis the playing of my herdsman,
Playing on a magic cow-horn,
Bursting all our ears with music!”

Kullerwoinen, drawing nearer,
To the hostess spake as follows:
“Found the bugle in the woodlands,
And the flute among the rushes;
All thy herd are in the passage,
All thy cows within the hurdles,
This the time to build the camp-fire,
This the time to do the milking!”

Ilmarinen’s wife, the hostess,
Thus addressed an aged servant:
“Go, thou old one, to the milking,
Have the care of all my cattle,
Do not ask for mine assistance,
Since I have to knead the biscuit.”
Kullerwoinen spake as follows:
“Always does the worthy hostess,
Ever does the wisdom-mother
Go herself and do the milking,
Tend the cows within the hurdles!”

Then the wife of Ilmarinen
Built a field-fire in the passage,
Went to milk her cows awaiting,
Looked upon her herd in wonder,
Spake these happy words of greeting:
“Beautiful, my herd of cattle,
Glistening like the skins of lynxes,
Hair as soft as fur of ermine,
Peaceful waiting for the milk-pail!”

On the milk-stool sits the hostess,
Milks one moment, then a second,
Then a third time milks and ceases;
When the bloody wolves disguising,
Quick attack the hostess milking,
And the bears lend their assistance,
Tear and mutilate her body
With their teeth and sharpened fingers.
Kullerwoinen, cruel wizard,
Thus repaid the wicked hostess,
Thus repaid her evil treatment.

Quick the wife of Ilmarinen
Cried aloud in bitter anguish,
Thus addressed the youth, Kullervo:
“Evil son, thou bloody herdsman,
Thou hast brought me wolves in malice,
Driven bears within my hurdles!”
These the words of Kullerwoinen:
“Have I evil done as shepherd,
Worse the conduct of the hostess;
Baked a stone inside my oat-cake,
On the inside, rock and tan-bark,
On the stone my knife, was broken,
Treasure of my mother’s household,
Broken virtue of my people!”
Ilmarinen’s wife made answer:
“Noble herdsman, Kullerwoinen,
Change, I pray thee, thine opinion,
Take away thine incantations,
From the bears and wolves release me,
Save me from this spell of torture;
I will give thee better raiment,
Give the best of milk and butter,
Set for thee the sweetest table;
Thou shalt live with me in welcome,
Need not labor for thy keeping.
If thou dost not free me quickly,
Dost not break this spell of magic,
I shall sink into the Death-land,
Shall return to Tuonela.”
This is Kullerwoinen’s answer:
“It is best that thou shouldst perish,
Let destruction overtake thee,
There is ample room in Mana,
Room for all the dead in Kalma,
There the worthiest must slumber,
There must rest the good and evil.”
Ilmarinen’s wife made answer:
“Ukko, thou O God in heaven,
Span the strongest of thy cross-bows,
Test the weapon by thy wisdom,
Lay an arrow forged from copper,
On the cross-bow of thy forging;
Rightly aim thy flaming arrow,
With thy magic hurl the missile,
Shoot this wizard through the vitals,
Pierce the heart of Kullerwoinen
With the lightning of the heavens,
With thine arrows tipped with copper.”
Kullerwoinen prays as follows:
“Ukko, God of truth and justice.
Do not slay thy magic servant,
Slay the wife of Ilmarinen,
Kill in her the worst of women,
In these hurdles let her perish,
Lest she wander hence in freedom,
To perform some other mischief,
Do some greater deed of malice!”

Quick as lightning fell the hostess,
Quick the wife of Ilmarinen
Fell and perished in the hurdles,
On the ground before her cottage;
Thus the death of Northland’s hostess,
Cherished wife of Ilmarinen,
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Wooed and watched for many summers,
Pride and joy of Kalevala!




RUNE XXXIV.
KULLERVO FINDS HIS TRIBE-FOLK.


Kullerwoinen, young magician,
In his beauteous, golden ringlets,
In his magic shoes of deer-skin,
Left the home of Ilmarinen
Wandered forth upon his journey,
Ere the blacksmith heard the tidings
Of the cruel death and torture
Of his wife and joy-companion,
Lest a bloody fight should follow.

Kullerwoinen left the smithy,
Blowing on his magic bugle,
Joyful left the lands of Ilma,
Blowing blithely on the heather,
Made the distant hills re-echo,
Made the swamps and mountains tremble,
Made the heather-blossoms answer
To the music of his cow-horn,
In its wild reverberations,
To the magic of his playing.
Songs were heard within the smithy,
And the blacksmith stopped and listened,
Hastened to the door and window,
Hastened to the open court-yard,
If perchance he might discover
What was playing on the heather,
What was sounding through the forest.
Quick he learned the cruel story,
Learned the cause of the rejoicing,
Saw the hostess dead before him,
Knew his beauteous wife had perished,
Saw the lifeless form extended,
In the court-yard of his dwelling.
Thereupon the metal-artist
Fell to bitter tears and wailings,
Wept through all the dreary night-time,
Deep the grief that settled o’er him,
Black as night his darkened future,
Could not stay his tears of sorrow.

Kullerwoinen hastened onward,
Straying, roaming, hither, thither,
Wandered on through field and forest,
O’er the Hisi-plains and woodlands.
When the darkness settled o’er him,
When the bird of night was flitting,
Sat the fatherless at evening,
The forsaken sat and rested
On a hillock of the forest.
Thus he murmured, heavy-hearted:
“Why was I, alas! created,
Why was I so ill-begotten,
Since for months and years I wander,
Lost among the ether-spaces?
Others have their homes to dwell in,
Others hasten to their firesides
As the evening gathers round them:
But my home is in the forest,
And my bed upon the heather,
And my bath-room is the rain-cloud.

“Never didst thou, God of mercy,
Never in the course of ages,
Give an infant birth unwisely;
Wherefore then was I created,
Fatherless to roam in ether,
Motherless and lone to wander?
Thou, O Ukko, art my father,
Thou hast given me form and feature;
As the sea-gull on the ocean,
As the duck upon the waters,
Shines the Sun upon the swallow,
Shines as bright upon the sparrow,
Gives the joy-birds song and gladness,
Does not shine on me unhappy;
Nevermore will shine the sunlight,
Never will the moonlight glimmer
On this hapless son and orphan;
Do not know my hero-father,
Cannot tell who was my mother;
On the shore, perhaps the gray-duck
Left me in the sand to perish.
Young was I and small of stature,
When my mother left me orphaned;
Dead, my father and my mother,
Dead, my honored tribe of heroes;
Shoes they left me that are icy,
Stockings filled with frosts of ages,
Let me on the freezing ice-plains
Fall to perish in the rushes;
From the giddy heights of mountains
Let me tumble to destruction.

“O, thou wise and good Creator,
Why my birth and what my service?
I shall never fall and perish
On the ice-plains, in the marshes,
Never be a bridge in swamp-land,
Not while I have arms of virtue
That can serve my honored kindred!”

Then Kullervo thought to journey
To the village of Untamo,
To avenge his father’s murder,
To avenge his mother’s tortures,
And the troubles of his tribe-folk.
These the words of Kullerwoinen:
“Wait, yea wait, thou Untamoinen,
Thou destroyer of my people;
When I meet thee in the combat,
I will slay thee and thy kindred,
I will burn thy homes to ashes!”

Came a woman on the highway,
Dressed in blue, the aged mother,
To Kullervo spake as follows:
“Whither goest, Kullerwoinen,
Whither hastes the wayward hero?”
Kullerwoinen gave this answer:
“I have thought that I would journey
To the far-off land of strangers,
To the village of Untamo,
To avenge my father’s murder,
To avenge my mother’s tortures,
And the troubles of my tribe-folk.”
Thus the gray-haired woman answered:
“Surely thou dost rest in error,
For thy tribe has never perished,
And thy mother still is living
With thy father in the Northland,
Living with the old Kalervo.”

“O, thou ancient dame beloved,
Worthy mother of the woodlands,
Tell me where my father liveth,
Where my loving mother lingers!”

“Yonder lives thine aged father,
And thy loving mother with him,
On the farthest shore of Northland,
On the long-point of the fish-lake!”

“Tell me, O thou woodland-mother,
How to journey to my people,
How to find mine honored tribe-folk.”

“Easy is the way for strangers:
Thou must journey through the forest,
Hasten to the river-border,
Travel one day, then a second,
And the third from morn till even,
To the north-west, thou must journey.
If a mountain comes to meet thee,
Go around the nearing mountain,
Westward hold thy weary journey,
Till thou comest to a river,
On thy right hand flowing eastward;
Travel to the river border,
Where three water-falls will greet thee;
When thou comest to a headland,
On the point thou’lt see a cottage
Where the fishermen assemble;
In this cottage is thy father,
With thy mother and her daughters,
Beautiful thy maiden sisters.”

Kullerwoinen, the magician,
Hastens northward on his journey,
Walks one day, and then a second,
Walks the third from morn till evening;
To the north-west walks Kullervo,
Till a mountain comes to meet him,
Walks around the nearing mountain;
Westward, westward, holds his journey,
Till he sees a river coming;
Hastens to the river border,
Walks along the streams and rapids
Till three waterfalls accost him;
Travels till he meets a headland,
On the point he spies a cottage,
Where the fishermen assemble.

Quick he journeys to the cabin,
Quick he passes through the portals
Of the cottage on the headland,
Where he finds his long-lost kindred;
No one knows the youth, Kullervo,
No one knows whence comes the stranger,
Where his home, nor where he goeth.
These the words of young Kullervo:
“Dost thou know me not, my mother,
Dost thou know me not, my father?
I am hapless Kullerwoinen,
Whom the heroes of Untamo
Carried to their distant country,
When my height was but a hand-breadth.”
Quick the hopeful mother answers:
“O my worthy son, beloved,
O my precious silver-buckle,
Hast thou with thy mind of magic,
Wandered through the fields of Northland
Searching for thy home and kindred?
As one dead I long have mourned thee,
Had supposed thee in Manala.
Once I had two sons and heroes,
Had two good and beauteous daughters,
Two of these have long been absent,
Elder son and elder daughter;
For the wars my son departed,
While my daughter strayed and perished;
If my son is home returning,
Yet my daughter still is absent.”
Kullerwoinen asked his mother:
“Whither did my sister wander,
What direction did she journey?”
This the answer of the mother:
“This the story of thy sister:
Went for berries to the woodlands,
To the mountains went my daughter,
Where the lovely maiden vanished,
Where my pretty berry perished,
Died some death beyond my knowledge,
Nameless is the death she suffered.
Who is mourning for the daughter?
No one mourns her as her mother,
Walks and wanders, mourns and searches,
For her fairest child and daughter;
Therefore did the mother wander,
Searching for thy lovely sister,
Like the bear she roamed the forest,
Ran the glenways like the adder,
Searched one day and then a second,
Searched the third from morn till even,
Till she reached the mountain-summit,
There she called and called her daughter,
Till the distant mountains answered,
Called to her who had departed:
‘Where art thou, my lovely maiden,
Come my daughter to thy mother!’

“Thus I called, and sought thy sister,
This the answer of the mountains,
Thus the hills and valleys echoed:
‘Call no more, thou weeping mother,
Weep no more for the departed;
Nevermore in all thy lifetime,
Never in the course of ages,
Will she join again her kindred,
At her brother’s landing-places,
In her father’s humble dwelling.’”




RUNE XXXV.
KULLERVO’S EVIL DEEDS.


Kullerwoinen, youthful wizard,
In his blue and scarlet stockings,
Henceforth lingered with his parents;
But he could not change his nature,
Could not gain a higher wisdom,
Could not win a better judgment;
As a child he was ill-nurtured,
Early rocked in stupid cradles,
By a nurse of many follies,
By a minister of evil.

To his work went Kullerwoinen,
Strove to make his labors worthy;
First, Kullervo went a-fishing,
Set his fishing-nets in ocean;
With his hands upon the row-locks,
Kullerwoinen spake as follows:
“Shall I pull with all my forces,
Pull with strength of youthful heroes,
Or with weakness of the aged?”

From the stern arose a gray-beard,
And he answered thus Kullervo:
“Pull with all thy youthful vigor;
Shouldst thou row with magic power,
Thou couldst not destroy this vessel,
Couldst not row this boat to fragments.”

Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,
Rowed with all his youthful vigor,
With the mighty force of magic,
Rowed the bindings from the vessel,
Ribs of juniper he shattered,
Rowed the aspen-oars to pieces.

When the aged sire, Kalervo,
Saw the work of Kullerwoinen,
He addressed his son as follows:
“Dost not understand the rowing;
Thou hast burst the bands asunder,
Bands of juniper and willow,
Rowed my aspen-boat to pieces;
To the fish-nets drive the salmon,
This, perchance, will suit thee better.”

Thereupon the son, Kullervo,
Hastened to his work as bidden,
Drove the salmon to the fish-nets,
Spake in innocence as follows:
“Shall I with my youthful vigor
Scare the salmon to the fish-nets,
Or with little magic vigor
Shall I drive them to their capture?”
Spake the master of the fish-nets:
“That would be but work of women,
Shouldst thou use but little power
In the frighting of the salmon!”

Kullerwoinen does as bidden,
Scares the salmon with the forces
Of his mighty arms and shoulders,
With the strength of youth and magic,
Stirs the water thick with black-earth,
Beats the scare-net into pieces,
Into pulp he beats the salmon.

When the aged sire, Kalervo,
Saw the work of Kullerwoinen,
To his son these words he uttered:
“Dost not understand this labor,
For this work thou art not suited,
Canst not scare the perch and salmon
To the fish-nets of thy father;
Thou hast ruined all my fish-nets,
Torn my scare-net into tatters,
Beaten into pulp the whiting,
Torn my net-props into fragments,
Beaten into bits my wedges.
Leave the fishing to another;
See if thou canst pay the tribute,
Pay my yearly contribution;
See if thou canst better travel,
On the way show better judgment!”

Thereupon the son, Kullervo,
Hapless youth in purple vestments,
In his magic shoes of deer-skin,
In his locks of golden color,
Sallied forth to pay the taxes,
Pay the tribute for his people.
When the youth had paid the tribute,
Paid the yearly contribution,
He returned to join the snow-sledge,
Took his place upon the cross-bench,
Snapped his whip above the courser,
And began his journey homeward;
Rattled on along the highway,
Measured as he galloped onward
Wainamoinen’s hills and valleys,
And his fields in cultivation.

Came a golden maid to meet him,
On her snow-shoes came a virgin,
O’er the hills of Wainamoinen,
O’er his cultivated lowlands.

Quick the wizard-son, Kullervo,
Checked the motion of his racer,
Thus addressed the charming maiden:
“Come, sweet maiden, to my snow-sledge,
In my fur-robes rest and linger!”
As she ran, the maiden answered:
“Let the Death-maid sit beside thee,
Rest and linger in thy fur-robes!”

Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,
Snapped his whip above the courser;
Fleet as wind he gallops homeward,
Dashes down along the highway;
With the roar of falling waters,
Gallops onward, onward, onward,
O’er the broad-back of the ocean,
O’er the icy plains of Lapland.

Comes a winsome maid to meet him,
Golden-haired, and wearing snow-shoes,
On the far outstretching ice-plains;
Quick the wizard checks his racer,
Charmingly accosts the maiden,
Chanting carefully these measures:
“Come, thou beauty, to my snow-sledge,
Hither come, and rest, and linger!”
Tauntingly the maiden answered:
“Take Tuoni to thy snow-sledge,
At thy side let Manalainen
Sit with thee, and rest, and linger!”

Quick the wizard, Kullerwoinen,
Struck his fiery, prancing racer,
With the birch-whip of his father.
Like the lightning flew the fleet-foot,
Galloped on the highway homeward;
O’er the hills the snow-sledge bounded,
And the coming mountains trembled.
Kullerwoinen, wild magician,
Measures, on his journey homeward,
Northland’s far-extending borders,
And the fertile plains of Pohya.
Comes a beauteous maid to meet him,
With a tin-pin on her bosom,
On the heather of Pohyola,
O’er the Pohya-hills and moorlands.

Quick the wizard son, Kullervo,
Holds the bridle of his courser,
Charmingly intones these measures:
“Come, fair maiden, to my snow-sledge,
In these fur-robes rest, and linger;
Eat with me the golden apples,
Eat the hazel-nut in joyance,
Drink with me the beer delicious,
Eat the dainties that I give thee.”

This the answer of the maiden
With the tin-pin on her bosom:
“I have scorn to give thy snow-sledge,
Scorn for thee, thou wicked wizard;
Cold is it beneath thy fur-robes,
And thy sledge is chill and cheerless.

Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,
Wicked wizard of the Northland,
Drew the maiden to his snow-sledge,
Drew her to a seat beside him,
Quickly in his furs enwrapped her;
And the tin-adorned made answer,
These the accents of the maiden:
“Loose me from thy magic power,
Let me leave at once thy presence,
Lest I speak in wicked accents,
Lest I say the prayer of evil;
Free me now as I command thee,
Or I’ll tear thy sledge to pieces,
Throw these fur-robes to the north-winds.”

Straightway wicked Kullerwoinen,
Evil wizard and magician,
Opens all his treasure-boxes,
Shows the maiden gold and silver,
Shows her silken wraps of beauty,
Silken hose with golden borders,
Golden belts with silver buckles,
Jewelry that dims the vision,
Blunts the conscience of the virgin.
Silver leads one to destruction,
Gold entices from uprightness.
Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,
Flatters lovingly the maiden,
One hand on the reins of leather,
One upon the maiden’s shoulder;
Thus they journey through the evening,
Pass the night in merry-making.

When the day-star led the morning,
When the second day was dawning,
Then the maid addressed Kullervo,
Questioned thus the wicked wizard:
“Of what tribe art thou descended,
Of what race thy hero-father?
Tell thy lineage and kindred.”
This, Kullervo’s truthful answer:
“Am not from a mighty nation,
Not the greatest, nor the smallest,
But my lineage is worthy:
Am Kalervo’s son of folly,
Am a child of contradictions,
Hapless son of cold misfortune.
Tell me of thy race of heroes,
Tell thine origin and kindred.”
This the answer of the maiden:
“Came not from a race primeval,
Not the largest, nor the smallest,
But my lineage is worthy;
Am Kalervo’s wretched daughter,
Am his long-lost child of error,
Am a maid of contradictions,
Hapless daughter of misfortune.

“When a child I lived in plenty
In the dwellings of my mother;
To the woods I went for berries,
Went for raspberries to uplands,
Gathered strawberries on mountains,
Gathered one day then a second;
But, alas! upon the third day,
Could not find the pathway homeward,
Forestward the highways led me,
All the footpaths, to the woodlands.
Long I sat in bitter weeping,
Wept one day and then a second,
Wept the third from morn till even.
Then I climbed a lofty mountain,
There I called in wailing accents,
And the woodlands gave this answer,
Thus the distant hills re-echoed:
‘Call no longer, foolish virgin,
All thy calls and tears are useless;
There is none to give thee answer,
Far away, thy home and people.’

“On the third and on the fourth days,
On the fifth, and sixth, and seventh,
Constantly I sought to perish;
But in vain were all my efforts,
Could not die upon the mountains.
If this wretched maid had perished,
In the summer of the third year,
She had fed earth’s vegetation,
She had blossomed as a flower,
Knowing neither pain nor sorrow.”

Scarcely had the maiden spoken,
When she bounded from the snow-sledge,
Rushed upon the rolling river,
To the cataract’s commotion,
To the fiery stream and whirlpool.
Thus Kullervo’s lovely sister
Hastened to her own destruction,
To her death by fire and water,
Found her peace in Tuonela,
In the sacred stream of Mana.

Then the wicked Kullerwoinen
Fell to weeping, sorely troubled,
Wailed, and wept, and heavy-hearted,
Spake these words in bitter sorrow:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!
I have slain my virgin-sister,
Shamed the daughter of my mother;
Woe to thee, my ancient father!
Woe to thee, my gray-haired mother!
Wherefore was I born and nurtured,
Why this hapless child’s existence?
Better fate to Kullerwoinen,
Had he never seen the daylight,
Or, if born, had never thriven
In these mournful days of evil!
Death has failed to do his duty,
Sickness sinned in passing by me,
Should have slain me in the cradle,
When the seventh day had ended!”

Thereupon he slips the collar
Of his prancing royal racer,
Mounts the silver-headed fleet-foot,
Gallops like the lightning homeward;
Gallops only for a moment,
When he halts his foaming courser
At the cabin of his father.
In the court-yard stood the mother,
Thus the wicked son addressed her:
“Faithful mother, fond and tender,
Hadst thou slain me when an infant,
Smoked my life out in the chamber,
In a winding-sheet hadst thrown me
To the cataract and whirlpool,
In the fire hadst set my cradle,
After seven nights had ended,
Worthy would have been thy service.
Had the village-maidens asked thee:
‘Where is now the little cradle,
Wherefore is the bath-room empty?’
This had been a worthy answer:
‘I have burned the wizard’s cradle,
Cast the infant to the fire-dogs;
In the bath-room corn is sprouting,
From the barley malt is brewing.’”

Thereupon the aged mother
Asks her wizard-son these questions:
“What has happened to my hero,
What new fate has overcome thee?
Comest thou as from Tuoni,
From the castles of Manala?”
This, Kullervo’s frank confession:
“Infamous the tale I bring thee,
My confession is dishonor:
On the way I met a maiden,
Met thy long-lost, wayward daughter,
Did not recognize my sister,
Fatal was the sin committed!
When the taxes had been settled,
When the tribute had been gathered,
Came a matchless maid to meet me,
Whom I witless led to sorrow,
This my mother’s long-lost daughter.
When she saw in me her brother,
Quick she bounded from the snow-sledge,
Hastened to the roaring waters,
To the cataract’s commotion,
To the fiery stream and whirlpool,
Hastened to her full destruction.

“Now, alas! must I determine,
Now must find a spot befitting,
Where thy sinful son may perish;
Tell me, all-forgiving mother,
Where to end my life of trouble;
Let me stop the black-wolf’s howling,
Let me satisfy the hunger
Of the vicious bear of Northland;
Let the shark or hungry sea-dog
Be my dwelling-place hereafter!”
This the answer of the mother:
“Do not go to stop the howling
Of the hungry wolf of Northland;
Do not haste to still the black-bear
Growling in his forest-cavern;
Let not shark, nor vicious sea-dog
Be thy dwelling-place hereafter.
Spacious are the rooms of Suomi,
Limitless the Sawa-borders,
Large enough to hide transgression,
Man’s misdeeds to hide for ages,
With his sins and evil actions.
Six long years man’s sins lie hidden
In the border-land of Kalma,
Even nine for magic heroes,
Till the years bring consolation,
Till they quiet all his mourning.”

Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,
Answers thus his grieving mother:
“Shall not haste to hide from sorrow,
Shall not flee from my misconduct;
To the jaws of death I hasten,
To the open courts of Kalma,
To the hunting-grounds of Pohya,
To the battle-fields of heroes.
Untamoinen still is living,
Unmolested roams the wicked,
Unavenged my father’s grievance,
Unavenged my mother’s tortures,
Unavenged the wrongs I suffer!”




RUNE XXXVI.
KULLERWOINEN’S VICTORY AND DEATH.


Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,
In his purple-colored stockings,
Now prepares himself for battle;
Grinds a long time on his broadsword,
Sharpens well his trusty weapon,
And his mother speaks as follows:
“Do not go, my son beloved,
Go not to the wars, my hero,
Struggle not with hostile spearsmen.
Whoso goes to war for nothing,
Undertakes a fearful combat,
Undertakes a fatal issue;
Those that war without a reason
Will be slaughtered for their folly,
Easy prey to bows and arrows.
Go thou with a goat to battle,
Shouldst thou go to fight the roebuck,
’Tis the goat that will be vanquished,
And the roebuck will be slaughtered;
With a frog thou’lt journey homeward,
Victor, with but little honor!”
These the words of Kullerwoinen:
“Shall not journey through the marshes,
Shall not sink upon the heather,
On the home-land of the raven,
Where the eagles scream at day-break.
When I yield my life forever,
Bravely will I fall in battle,
Fall upon the field of glory,
Beautiful to die in armor,
And the clang and clash of armies,
Beautiful the strife for conquest!
Thus Kullervo soon will hasten
To the kingdom of Tuoni,
To the realm of the departed,
Undeformed by wasting sickness.”
This the answer of the mother:
“If thou diest in the conflict,
Who will stay to guard thy father,
Who will give thy sire protection?”
These the words of Kullerwoinen:
“Let him die upon the court-yard,
Sleeping out his life of sorrow!”

“Who then will protect thy mother,
Be her shield in times of danger?”

“Let her die within the stable,
Or the cabin where she lingers!”

“Who then will defend thy brother,
Give him aid in times of trouble?”

“Let him die within the forest,
Sleep his life away unheeded!”

“Who will comfort then thy sister,
Who will aid her in affliction?”

“Let her sink beneath the waters,
Perish in the crystal fountain,
Where the brook flows on in beauty,
Like a silver serpent winding
Through the valley to the ocean!”

Thereupon the wild Kullervo
Hastens from his home to battle,
To his father speaks, departing:
“Fare thou well, my aged father!
Wilt thou weep for me, thy hero,
When thou hearest I have perished,
Fallen from thy tribe forever,
Perished on the field of glory?”
Thus the father speaks in answer:
“I shall never mourn the downfall
Of my evil son, Kullervo;
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;
Shall beget a second hero
That will do me better service,
That will think and act in wisdom.”
Kullerwoinen gives this answer:
“Neither shall I mourn thy downfall,
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;
I shall make a second father,
Make the head from loam and sandstone,
Make the eyes from swamp-land berries,
Make the beard from withered sea-grass,
Make the feet from roots of willow,
Make the form from birch-wood fungus.”

Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,
To his brother speaks as follows:
“Fare thou well, beloved brother!
Wilt thou weep for me departed,
Shouldst thou hear that I have perished,
Fallen on the field of battle?”
This the answer of the brother:
“I shall never mourn the downfall
Of my brother, Kullerwoinen,
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;
I shall find a second brother,
Find one worthier and wiser!”
This is Kullerwoinen’s answer:
“Neither shall I mourn thy downfall,
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;
I shall form a second brother,
Make the head from dust and ashes,
Make the eyes from pearls of ocean,
Make the beard from withered verdure,
Make the form from pulp of birch-wood.”
To his sister speaks Kullervo:
“Fare thou well, beloved sister!
Surely thou wilt mourn my downfall,
Weep for me when I have perished,
When thou hearest I have fallen
In the heat and din of battle,
Fallen from thy race forever!”
But the sister makes this answer:
“Never shall I mourn thy downfall,
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;
I shall seek a second brother,
Seek a brother, purer, better,
One that will not shame his sister!”
Kullerwoinen thus makes answer:
“Neither shall I mourn thee fallen,
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;
I shall form a second sister,
Make the head from whitened marble,
Make the eyes from golden moonbeams,
Make the tresses from the rainbow,
Make the ears from ocean-flowers,
And her form from gold and silver.

“Fare thou well, beloved mother,
Mother, beautiful and faithful!
Wilt thou weep when I have perished,
Fallen on the field of glory,
Fallen from thy race forever?”
Thus the mother speaks in answer:
“Canst not fathom love maternal,
Canst not smother her affection;
Bitterly I’ll mourn thy downfall,
I would weep if thou shouldst perish,
Shouldst thou leave my race forever;
I would weep in court or cabin,
Sprinkle all these fields with tear-drops,
Weep great rivers to the ocean,
Weep to melt the snows of Northland,
Make the hillocks green with weeping,
Weep at morning, weep at evening,
Weep three years in bitter sorrow
O’er the death of Kullerwoinen!”

Thereupon the wicked wizard
Went rejoicing to the combat;
In delight to war he hastened
O’er the fields, and fens, and fallows,
Shouting loudly on the heather,
Singing o’er the hills and mountains,
Rushing through the glens and forests,
Blowing war upon his bugle.

Time had gone but little distance,
When a messenger appearing,
Spake these words to Kullerwoinen:
“Lo! thine aged sire has perished,
Fallen from thy race forever;
Hasten home and do him honor,
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”
Kullerwoinen made this answer:
“Has my aged father perished,
There is home a sable stallion
That will take him to his slumber,
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”

Then Kullervo journeyed onward,
Calling war upon his bugle,
Till a messenger appearing,
Brought this word to Kullerwoinen:
“Lo! thy brother too has perished,
Dead he lies within the forest,
Manalainen’s trumpet called him;
Home return and do him honor,
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”
Kullerwoinen thus replying:
“Has my hero-brother perished,
There is home a sable stallion
That will take him to his slumber,
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”

Young Kullervo journeyed onward
Over vale and over mountain,
Playing on his reed of battle,
Till a messenger appearing
Brought the warrior these tidings:
“Lo! thy sister too has perished,
Perished in the crystal fountain,
Where the waters flow in beauty,
Like a silver serpent winding
Through the valley to the ocean;
Home return and do her honor,
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.”
These the words of Kullerwoinen:
“Has my beauteous sister perished,
Fallen from my race forever,
There is home a sable filly
That will take her to her resting,
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.”

Still Kullervo journeyed onward,
Through the fens he went rejoicing,
Sounding war upon his bugle,
Till a messenger appearing
Brought to him these words of sorrow:
“Lo! thy mother too has perished,
Died in anguish, broken-hearted;
Home return and do her honor,
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.”
These the measures of Kullervo:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated,
That my mother too has perished,
She that nursed me in my cradle,
Made my couch a golden cover,
Twirled for me the spool and spindle!
Lo! Kullervo was not present
When his mother’s life departed;
May have died upon the mountains,
Perished there from cold and hunger.
Lave the dead form of my mother
In the crystal waters flowing;
Wrap her in the robes of ermine,
Tie her hands with silken ribbon,
Take her to the grave of ages,
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.
Bury her with songs of mourning,
Let the singers chant my sorrow;
Cannot leave the fields of battle
While Untamo goes unpunished,
Fell destroyer of my people.”

Kullerwoinen journeyed onward,
Still rejoicing, to the combat,
Sang these songs in supplication:
“Ukko, mightiest of rulers,
Loan to me thy sword of battle,
Grant to me thy matchless weapon,
And against a thousand armies
I will war and ever conquer.”

Ukko gave the youth his broadsword,
Gave his blade of magic powers
To the wizard, Kullerwoinen.
Thus equipped, the mighty hero
Slew the people of Untamo,
Burned their villages to ashes;
Only left the stones and ovens,
And the chimneys of their hamlets.

Then the conqueror, Kullervo,
Turned his footsteps to his home-land,
To the cabin of his father,
To his ancient fields and forests.
Empty did he find the cabin,
And the forests were deserted;
No one came to give him greeting,
None to give the hand of welcome;
Laid his fingers on the oven,
But he found it cold and lifeless;
Then he knew to satisfaction
That his mother lived no longer;
Laid his hand upon the fire-place,
Cold and lifeless were the hearth-stones;
Then he knew to satisfaction
That his sister too had perished;
Then he sought the landing-places,
Found no boats upon the rollers;
Then he knew to satisfaction
That his brother too had perished;
Then he looked upon the fish-nets,
And he found them torn and tangled;
And he knew to satisfaction
That his father too had perished.

Bitterly he wept and murmured,
Wept one day, and then a second,
On the third day spake as follows:
“Faithful mother, fond and tender,
Why hast left me here to sorrow
In this wilderness of trouble?
But thou dost not hear my calling,
Though I sing in magic accents,
Though my tear-drops speak lamenting,
Though my heart bemoans thine absence.

From her grave awakes the mother,
To Kullervo speaks these measures:
“Thou has still the dog remaining,
He will lead thee to the forest;
Follow thou the faithful watcher,
Let him lead thee to the woodlands,
To the farthest woodland border,
To the caverns of the wood-nymphs;
There the forest maidens linger,
They will give thee food and shelter,
Give my hero joyful greetings.”

Kullerwoinen, with his watch-dog,
Hastens onward through the forest,
Journeys on through fields and fallows;
Journeys but a little distance,
Till he comes upon the summit
Where he met his long-lost sister;
Finds the turf itself is weeping,
Finds the glen-wood filled with sorrow,
Finds the heather shedding tear-drops,
Weeping are the meadow-flowers,
O’er the ruin of his sister.

Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,
Grasps the handle of his broadsword,
Asks the blade this simple question:
“Tell me, O my blade of honor,
Dost thou wish to drink my life-blood,
Drink the blood of Kullerwoinen?”

Thus his trusty sword makes answer,
Well divining his intentions:
“Why should I not drink thy life-blood,
Blood of guilty Kullerwoinen,
Since I feast upon the worthy,
Drink the life-blood of the righteous?”

Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,
Wicked wizard of the Northland,
Lifts the mighty sword of Ukko,
Bids adieu to earth and heaven;
Firmly thrusts the hilt in heather,
To his heart he points the weapon,
Throws his weight upon his broadsword,
Pouring out his wicked life-blood,
Ere he journeys to Manala.
Thus the wizard finds destruction,
This the end of Kullerwoinen,
Born in sin, and nursed in folly.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
As he hears the joyful tidings,
Learns the death of fell Kullervo,
Speaks these words of ancient wisdom:
“O, ye many unborn nations,
Never evil nurse your children,
Never give them out to strangers,
Never trust them to the foolish!
If the child is not well nurtured,
Is not rocked and led uprightly,
Though he grow to years of manhood,
Bear a strong and shapely body,
He will never know discretion,
Never eat the bread of honor,
Never drink the cup of wisdom.”




RUNE XXXVII.
ILMARINEN’S BRIDE OF GOLD.


Ilmarinen, metal-worker,
Wept one day, and then a second,
Wept the third from morn till evening,
O’er the death of his companion,
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow;
Did not swing his heavy hammer,
Did not touch its copper handle,
Made no sound within his smithy,
Made no blow upon his anvil,
Till three months had circled over;
Then the blacksmith spake as follows:
“Woe is me, unhappy hero!
Do not know how I can prosper;
Long the days, and cold, and dreary,
Longer still the nights, and colder;
I am weary in the evening,
In the morning still am weary,
Have no longing for the morning,
And the evening is unwelcome;
Have no pleasure in the future,
All my pleasures gone forever,
With my faithful life-companion
Slaughtered by the hand of witchcraft!
Often will my heart-strings quiver
When I rest within my chamber,
When I wake at dreamy midnight,
Half-unconscious, vainly searching
For my noble wife departed.”

Wifeless lived the mourning blacksmith,
Altered in his form and features;
Wept one month and then another,
Wept three months in full succession.
Then the magic metal-worker
Gathered gold from deeps of ocean,
Gathered silver from the mountains,
Gathered many heaps of birch-wood.
Filled with faggots thirty sledges,
Burned the birch-wood into ashes;
Put the ashes in the furnace,
Laid the gold upon the embers,
Lengthwise laid a piece of silver
Of the size of lambs in autumn,
Or the fleet-foot hare in winter;
Places servants at the bellows,
Thus to melt the magic metals.
Eagerly the servants labor,
Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen
Fan the flames within the furnace.

Ilmarinen, magic blacksmith,
Works unceasing at his forging,
Thus to mould a golden image,
Mould a bride from gold and silver;
But the workmen fail their master,
Faithless stand they at the bellows.
Wow the artist, Ilmarinen,
Fans the flame with force of magic,
Blows one day, and then a second,
Blows the third from morn till even;
Then he looks within the furnace,
Looks around the oven-border,
Hoping there to see an image
Rising from the molten metals.

Comes a lambkin from the furnace,
Rising from the fire of magic,
Wearing hair of gold and copper,
Laced with many threads of silver;
All rejoice but Ilmarinen
At the beauty of the image.
This the language of the blacksmith:
“May the wolf admire thy graces;
I desire a bride of beauty
Born from molten gold and silver!”

Ilmarinen, the magician,
To the furnace threw the lambkin;
Added gold in great abundance,
And increased the mass of silver,
Added other magic metals,
Set the workmen at the bellows;
Zealously the servants labor,
Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen
Fan the flames within the furnace.

Ilmarinen, wizard-forgeman,
Works unceasing with his metals,
Moulding well a golden image,
Wife of molten gold and silver;
But the workmen fail their master,
Faithless do they ply the bellows.

Now the artist, Ilmarinen,
Fans the flames by force of magic;
Blows one day, and then a second,
Blows a third from morn till evening,
When he looks within the furnace,
Looks around the oven-border,
Hoping there to see an image
Rising from the molten metals.
From the flames a colt arises,
Golden-maned and silver-headed,
Hoofs are formed of shining copper.
All rejoice but Ilmarinen
At the wonderful creation;
This the language of the blacksmith:
“Let the bears admire thy graces;
I desire a bride of beauty
Born of many magic metals.”

Thereupon the wonder-forger
Drives the colt back to the furnace,
Adds a greater mass of silver,
And of gold the rightful measure,
Sets the workmen at the bellows.
Eagerly the servants labor,
Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen
Fan the flames within the furnace.

Ilmarinen, the magician,
Works unceasing at his witchcraft,
Moulding well a golden maiden,
Bride of molten gold and silver;
But the workmen fail their master,
Faithlessly they ply the bellows.

Now the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Fans the flames with magic powers,
Blows one day, and then a second,
Blows a third from morn till even;
Then he looks within his furnace,
Looks around the oven-border,
Trusting there to see a maiden
Coming from the molten metals.
From the fire a virgin rises,
Golden-haired and silver-headed,
Beautiful in form and feature.
All are filled with awe and wonder,
But the artist and magician.
Ilmarinen, metal-worker,
Forges nights and days unceasing,
On the bride of his creation;
Feet he forges for the maiden,
Hands and arms, of gold and silver;
But her feet are not for walking,
Neither can her arms embrace him.
Ears he forges for the virgin,
But her ears are not for hearing;
Forges her a mouth of beauty,
Eyes he forges bright and sparkling;
But the magic mouth is speechless,
And the eyes are not for seeing.
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:
“This, indeed, a priceless maiden,
Could she only speak in wisdom,
Could she breathe the breath of Ukko!”

Thereupon he lays the virgin
On his silken couch of slumber,
On his downy place of resting.
Ilmarinen heats his bath-room,
Makes it ready for his service,
Binds together silken brushes,
Brings three cans of crystal water,
Wherewithal to lave the image,
Lave the golden maid of beauty.
When this task had been completed,
Ilmarinen, hoping, trusting,
Laid his golden bride to slumber,
On his downy couch of resting;
Ordered many silken wrappings,
Ordered bear-skins, three in number,
Ordered seven lambs-wool blankets,
Thus to keep him warm in slumber,
Sleeping by the golden image
Re had forged from magic metals.
Warm the side of Ilmarinen
That was wrapped in furs and blankets;
Chill the parts beside the maiden,
By his bride of gold and silver;
One side warm, the other lifeless,
Turning into ice from coldness.
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:
“Not for me was born this virgin
From the magic molten metals;
I shall take her to Wainola,
Give her to old Wainamoinen,
As a bride and life-companion,
Comfort to him in his dotage.”

Ilmarinen, much disheartened,
Takes the virgin to Wainola,
To the plains of Kalevala,
To his brother speaks as follows:
“O, thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Look with favor on this image;
Make the maiden fair and lovely,
Beautiful in form and feature,
Suited to thy years declining!”

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Looked in wonder on the virgin,
On the golden bride of beauty,
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:
“Wherefore dost thou bring this maiden,
Wherefore bring to Wainamoinen
Bride of molten gold and silver?”
Spake in answer Ilmarinen:
“Wherefore should I bring this image,
But for purposes the noblest?
I have brought her as companion
To thy life in years declining,
As a joy and consolation,
When thy days are full of trouble!”
Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:
“Magic brother, wonder-forger,
Throw the virgin to the furnace,
To the flames, thy golden image,
Forge from her a thousand trinkets.
Take the image into Ehstland,
Take her to the plains of Pohya,
That for her the mighty powers
May engage in deadly contest,
Worthy trophy for the victor;
Not for me this bride of wonder,
Neither for my worthy people.
I shall never wed an image
Born from many magic metals,
Never wed a silver maiden,
Never wed a golden virgin.”
Then the hero of the waters
Called together all his people,
Spake these words of ancient wisdom:
“Every child of Northland, listen,
Whether poor, or fortune-favored:
Never bow before an image
Born of molten gold and silver;
Never while the sunlight brightens,
Never while the moonlight glimmers,
Choose a maiden of the metals,
Choose a bride from gold created;
Cold the lips of golden maiden,
Silver breathes the breath of sorrow.”




RUNE XXXVIII.
ILMARINEN’S FRUITLESS WOOING.


Ilmarinen, the magician,
The eternal metal-artist,
Lays aside the golden image,
Beauteous maid of magic metals;
Throws the harness on his courser,
Binds him to his sledge of birch-wood,
Seats himself upon the cross-bench,
Snaps the whip above the racer,
Thinking once again to journey
To the mansions of Pohyola,
There to woo a bride in honor,
Second daughter of the Northland.

On he journeyed, restless, northward,
Journeyed one day, then a second,
So the third from morn till evening,
When he reached a Northland-village
On the plains of Sariola.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Standing in the open court-yard,
Spied the hero, Ilmarinen,
Thus addressed the metal-worker:
“Tell me how my child is living,
How the Bride of Beauty prospers,
As a daughter to thy mother.”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Head bent down and brow dejected,
Thus addressed the Northland hostess:
“O, thou dame of Sariola,
Do not ask me of thy daughter,
Since, alas! in Tuonela
Sleeps the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Sleeps in death the Bride of Beauty,
Underneath the fragrant heather,
In the kingdom of Manala.
Come I for a second daughter,
For the fairest of thy virgins.
Beauteous hostess of Pohyola,
Give to me thy youngest maiden,
For my former wife’s compartments,
For the chambers of her sister.”

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:
“Foolish was the Northland-hostess,
When she gave her fairest virgin,
In the bloom of youth and beauty
To the blacksmith of Wainola,
Only to be led to Mana,
Like a lambkin to the slaughter!
I shall never give my daughter,
Shall not give my youngest maiden
Bride of thine to be hereafter,
Life-companion at thy fireside.
Sooner would I give the fair one
To the cataract and whirlpool,
To the river of Manala,
To the waters of Tuoni!”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Drew away his head, disdainful,
Shook his sable locks in anger,
Entered to the inner court-room,
Where the maiden sat in waiting,
Spake these measures to the daughter:
“Come with me, thou bright-eyed maiden,
To the cottage where thy sister
Lived and lingered in contentment,
Baked for me the toothsome biscuit,
Brewed for me the beer of barley,
Kept my dwelling-place in order.”

On the floor a babe was lying,
Thus he sang to Ilmarinen:
“Uninvited, leave this mansion,
Go, thou stranger, from this dwelling;
Once before thou camest hither,
Only bringing pain and trouble,
Filling all our hearts with sorrow.
Fairest daughter of my mother,
Do not give this suitor welcome,
Look not on his eyes with pleasure,
Nor admire his form and features.
In his mouth are only wolf-teeth,
Cunning fox-claws in his mittens,
In his shoes art only bear-claws,
In his belt a hungry dagger;
Weapons these of blood and murder,
Only worn by the unworthy.”

Then the daughter spake as follows
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:
“Follow thee this maid will never,
Never heed unworthy suitors;
Thou hast slain the Bride of Beauty,
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow,
Thou wouldst also slay her sister.
I deserve a better suitor,
Wish a truer, nobler husband,
Wish to ride in richer sledges,
Have a better home-protection;
Never will I sweep the cottage
And the coal-place of a blacksmith.”

Then the hero, Ilmarinen,
The eternal metal-artist,
Turned his head away, disdainful,
Shook his sable locks in anger,
Quickly seized the trembling maiden,
Held her in his grasp of iron,
Hastened from the court of Louhi,
To his sledge upon the highway.
In his sleigh he seats the virgin,
Snugly wraps her in his fur-robes,
Snaps his whip above the racer,
Gallops on the high-road homeward;
With one hand the reins he tightens,
With the other holds the maiden.
Speaks the virgin-daughter, weeping:
“We have reached the lowland-berries,
Here the herbs of water-borders;
Leave me here to sink and perish
As a child of cold misfortune.
Wicked Ilmarinen, listen!
If thou dost not quickly free me,
I will break thy sledge to pieces,
Throw thy fur-robes to the north-winds.”
Ilmarinen makes this answer:
“When the blacksmith builds his snow-sledge,
All the parts are hooped with iron;
Therefore will the beauteous maiden
Never beat my sledge to fragments.”

Then the silver-tinselled daughter
Wept and wailed in bitter accents,
Wrung her hands in desperation,
Spake again to Ilmarinen:
“If thou dost not quickly free me,
I shall change to ocean-salmon,
Be a whiting of the waters.”

“Thou wilt never thus escape me,
As a pike I’ll fleetly follow.”

Then the maiden of Pohyola
Wept and wailed in bitter accents,
Wrung her hands in desperation,
Spake again to Ilmarinen;
“If thou dost not quickly free me,
I shall hasten to the forest,
Mid the rocks become an ermine!”

“Thou wilt never thus escape me,
As a serpent I will follow.”

Then the beauty of the Northland,
Wailed and wept in bitter accents,
Wrung her hands in desperation,
Spake once more to Ilmarinen:
“Surely, if thou dost not free me,
As a lark I’ll fly the ether,
Hide myself within the storm-clouds.”

“Neither wilt thou thus escape me,
As an eagle I will follow.”

They had gone but little distance,
When the courser shied and halted,
Frighted at some passing object;
And the maiden looked in wonder,
In the snow beheld some foot-prints,
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:
“Who has run across our highway?”

“’Tis the timid hare”, he answered.
Thereupon the stolen maiden
Sobbed, and moaned, in deeps of sorrow,
Heavy-hearted, spake these measures:
“Woe is me, ill-fated virgin!
Happier far my life hereafter,
If the hare I could but follow
To his burrow in the woodlands!
Crook-leg’s fur to me is finer
Than the robes of Ilmarinen.”

Ilmarinen, the magician,
Tossed his head in full resentment,
Galloped on the highway homeward;
Travelled but a little distance,
When again his courser halted,
Frighted at some passing stranger.
Quick the maiden looked and wondered,
In the snow beheld some foot-prints,
Spake these measures to the blacksmith:
“Who has crossed our snowy pathway?”

“’Tis a fox”, replied the minstrel.
Thereupon the beauteous virgin
Moaned again in depths of anguish,
Sang these accents, heavy-hearted:
“Woe is me, ill-fated maiden!
Happier far my life hereafter,
With the cunning fox to wander,
Than with this ill-mannered suitor;
Reynard’s fur to me is finer
Than the robes of Ilmarinen.”

Thereupon the metal-worker
Shut his lips in sore displeasure,
Hastened on the highway homeward;
Travelled but a little distance,
When again his courser halted.

Quick the maiden looked in wonder,
In the snow beheld some foot-prints,
Spake these words to the magician:
“Who again has crossed our pathway?”

“’Tis the wolf”, said Ilmarinen.
Thereupon the fated daughter
Fell again to bitter weeping,
And intoned these words of sorrow:
“Woe is me, a hapless maiden!
Happier far my life hereafter,
Brighter far would be my future,
If these tracks I could but follow;
On the wolf the hair is finer
Than the furs of Ilmarinen,
Faithless suitor of the Northland.”

Then the minstrel of Wainola
Closed his lips again in anger,
Shook his sable locks, resentful,
Snapped the whip above the racer,
And the steed flew onward swiftly,
O’er the way to Kalevala,
To the village of the blacksmith.

Sad and weary from his journey,
Ilmarinen, home-returning,
Fell upon his couch in slumber,
And the maiden laughed derision.

In the morning, slowly waking,
Head confused, and locks dishevelled,
Spake the wizard, words as follow:
“Shall I set myself to singing
Magic songs and incantations?
Shall I now enchant this maiden
To a black-wolf on the mountains,
To a salmon of the ocean?
Shall not send her to the woodlands,
All the forest would be frighted;
Shall not send her to the waters,
All the fish would flee in terror;
This my sword shall drink her life-blood,
End her reign of scorn and hatred.”

Quick the sword feels his intention,
Quick divines his evil purpose,
Speaks these words to Ilmarinen:
“Was not born to drink the life-blood
Of a maiden pure and lovely,
Of a fair but helpless virgin.”

Thereupon the magic minstrel,
Filled with rage, began his singing;
Sang the very rocks asunder,
Till the distant hills re-echoed;
Sang the maiden to a sea-gull,
Croaking from the ocean-ledges,
Calling from the ocean-islands,
Screeching on the sandy sea-coast,
Flying to the winds opposing.
When his conjuring had ended,
Ilmarinen joined his snow-sledge,
Whipped his steed upon a gallop,
Hastened to his ancient smithy,
To his home in Kalevala.

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Comes to meet him on the highway,
Speaks these words to the magician:
“Ilmarinen, worthy brother,
Wherefore comest heavy-hearted
From the dismal Sariola?
Does Pohyola live and prosper?”
Spake the minstrel, Ilmarinen:
“Why should not Pohyola prosper?
There the Sampo grinds unceasing,
Noisy rocks the lid in colors;
Grinds one day the flour for eating,
Grinds the second flour for selling,
Grinds the third day flour for keeping;
Thus it is Pohyola prospers.
While the Sampo is in Northland,
There is plowing, there is sowing,
There is growth of every virtue,
There is welfare never-ending.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Ilmarinen, artist-brother,
Where then is the Northland-daughter,
Far renowned and beauteous maiden,
For whose hand thou hast been absent?”
These the words of Ilmarinen:
“I have changed the hateful virgin
To a sea-gull on the ocean;
Now she calls above the waters,
Screeches from the ocean-islands;
On the rocks she calls and murmurs,
Vainly calling for a suitor.”




RUNE XXXIX.
WAINAMOINEN’S SAILING.


Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:
“O thou wonder-working brother,
Let us go to Sariola,
There to gain the magic Sampo,
There to see the lid in colors.”
Ilmarinen gave this answer:
“Hard indeed to seize the Sampo,
Neither can the lid be captured
From the never-pleasant Northland,
From the dismal Sariola.
Louhi took away the Sampo,
Carried off the lid in colors
To the stone-mount of Pohyola;
Hid it in the copper mountain,
Where nine locks secure the treasure.
Many young roots sprout around it,
Grow nine fathoms deep in sand-earth,
One great root beneath the mountain,
In the cataract a second,
And a third beneath the castle
Built upon the mount of ages.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Brother mine, and wonder-worker,
Let us go to Sariola,
That we may secure the Sampo;
Let us build a goodly vessel,
Bring the Sampo to Wainola,
Bring away the lid in colors,
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,
From the copper-bearing mountain.
Where the miracle lies anchored.”
Ilmarinen thus made answer:
“By the land the way is safer,
Lempo travels on the ocean,
Ghastly Death upon his shoulder;
On the sea the waves will drift us,
And the storm-winds wreck our vessel;
Then our hands must do the rowing,
And our feet must steer us homeward.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Safe indeed by land to journey,
But the way is rough and trying,
Long the road and full of turnings;
Lovely is the ship on ocean,
Beautiful to ride the billows,
Journey easy o’er the waters,
Sailing in a trusty vessel;
Should the West-wind cross our pathway,
Will the South-wind drive us northward.
Be that as it may, my brother,
Since thou dost not love the water,
By the land then let us journey.
Forge me now the sword of battle,
Forge for me the mighty fire-sword,
That I may destroy the wild-beasts,
Frighten all the Northland people,
As we journey for the Sampo
To the cold and dismal village,
To the never-pleasant Northland,
To the dismal Sariola.”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
The eternal forger-artist,
Laid the metals in the furnace,
In the fire laid steel and iron,
In the hot-coals, gold and silver,
Rightful measure of the metals;
Set the workmen at the furnace,
Lustily they plied the bellows.
Like the wax the iron melted,
Like the dough the hard steel softened,
Like the water ran the silver,
And the liquid gold flowed after.

Then the minstrel, Ilmarinen,
The eternal wonder-forger,
Looks within his magic furnace,
On the border of his oven,
There beholds the fire-sword forming,
Sees the blade with golden handle;
Takes the weapon from the furnace,
Lays it on his heavy anvil
For the falling of the hammer;
Forges well the blade of magic,
Well the heavy sword he tempers,
Ornaments the hero-weapon
With the finest gold and silver.

Wainamoinen, the magician,
Comes to view the blade of conquest,
Lifts admiringly the fire-sword,
Then these words the hero utters:
“Does the weapon match the soldier,
Does the handle suit the bearer?
Yea, the blade and hilt are molded
To the wishes of the minstrel.”

On the sword-point gleams the moonlight,
On the blade the sun is shining,
On the hilt the bright stars twinkle,
On the edge a horse is neighing,
On the handle plays a kitten,
On the sheath a dog is barking.

Wainamoinen wields his fire-sword,
Tests it on the iron-mountain,
And these words the hero utters:
“With this broadsword I could quickly
Cleave in twain the mount of Pohya,
Cut the flinty rocks asunder.”
Spake the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:
“Wherewith shall I guard from danger,
How protect myself from evil,
From the ills by land and water?
Shall I wear an iron armor,
Belt of steel around my body?
Stronger is a man in armor,
Safer in a mail of copper.”

Now the time has come to journey
To the never-pleasant Northland;
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
And his brother, Ilmarinen,
Hasten to the field and forest,
Searching for their fiery coursers,
In each shining belt a bridle,
With a harness on their shoulders.
In the woods they find a race;
In the glen a steed of battle,
Ready for his master’s service.
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Throw the harness on the courser,
Hitch him to the sledge of conquest,
Hasten on their journey northward;
Drive along the broad-sea’s margin
Till they hear some one lamenting,
On the strand hear something wailing
Near the landing-place of vessels.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Speaks these words in wonder, guessing:
“This must be some maiden weeping,
Some fair daughter thus lamenting;
Let us journey somewhat nearer,
To discover whence this wailing.”

Drew they nearer, nearer, nearer,
Hoping thus to find a maiden
Weeping on the sandy sea-shore.
It was not a maiden weeping,
But a vessel, sad, and lonely,
Waiting on the shore and wailing.
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Why art weeping, goodly vessel,
What the cause of thy lamenting?
Art thou mourning for thy row-locks,
Is thy rigging ill-adjusted?
Dost thou weep since thou art anchored
On the shore in times of trouble?”
Thus the war-ship spake in answer:
“To the waters would this vessel
Haste upon the well-tarred rollers,
As a happy maiden journeys
To the cottage of her husband.
I, alas! a goodly vessel,
Weep because I lie at anchor,
Weep and wail because no hero
Sets me free upon the waters,
Free to ride the rolling billows.
It was said when I was fashioned,
Often sung when I was building,
That this bark should be for battle,
Should become a mighty war-ship,
Carry in my hull great treasures,
Priceless goods across the ocean.
Never have I sailed to conquest,
Never have I carried booty;
Other vessels not as worthy
To the wars are ever sailing,
Sailing to the songs of battle.
Three times in the summer season
Come they home with treasures laden,
In their hulls bring gold and silver;
I, alas! a worthy vessel,
Many months have lain at anchor,
I, a war-ship well constructed,
Am decaying in the harbor,
Never having sailed to conquest;
Worms are gnawing at my vitals,
In my hull their dwelling-places,
And ill-omened birds of heaven
Build their nests within my rigging;
Frogs and lizards of the forest
Play about my oars and rudder;
Three times better for this vessel
Were he but a valley birch-tree,
Or an aspen on the heather,
With the squirrels in his branches,
And the dogs beneath them barking!”

Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Thus addressed the ship at anchor:
“Weep no more, thou goodly vessel,
Man-of-war, no longer murmur;
Thou shalt sail to Sariola,
Sing the war-songs of the Northland,
Sail with us to deadly combat.
Wert thou built by the Creator,
Thou canst sail the roughest waters,
Sidewise journey o’er the ocean;
Dost not need the hand to touch thee,
Dost not need the foot to turn thee,
Needing nothing to propel thee.”
Thus the weeping boat made answer:
“Cannot sail without assistance,
Neither can my brother-vessels
Sail unaided o’er the waters,
Sail across the waves undriven.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Should I lead thee to the broad-sea,
Wilt thou journey north unaided,
Sail without the help of rowers,
Sail without the aid of south-winds,
Sail without the helm to guide thee?”
Thus the wailing ship replying:
“Cannot sail without assistance,
Neither can my brother-vessels
Sail without the aid of rowers,
Sail without the help of south-winds,
Nor without the helm to guide them.”
These the words of Wainamoinen:
“Wilt thou run with aid of oarsmen
When the south-winds give assistance,
Guided by a skillful pilot?”
This the answer of the war-ship:
“Quickly can I course these waters,
When my oars are manned by rowers,
When my sails are filled with south-winds,
All my goodly brother-vessels
Sail the ocean with assistance,
When the master holds the rudder.”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Left the racer on the sea-side,
Tied him to the sacred birch-tree,
Hung the harness on a willow,
Rolled the vessel to the waters,
Sang the ship upon the broad-sea,
Asked the boat this simple question:
“O thou vessel, well-appearing
From the mighty oak constructed,
Art thou strong to carry treasures
As in view thou art commanding?”
Thus the goodly ship made answer:
“Strong am I to carry treasures,
In my hull a golden cargo;
I can bear a hundred oarsmen,
And of warriors a thousand.”

Wainamoinen, the magician,
Then began his wondrous singing.
On one side the magic vessel,
Sang he youth with golden virtues,
Bearded youth with strength of heroes,
Sang them into mail of copper.
On the other side the vessel,
Sang he silver-tinselled maidens,
Girded them with belts of copper,
Golden rings upon their fingers.
Sings again the great magician,
Fills the magic ship with heroes,
Ancient heroes, brave and mighty;
Sings them into narrow limits,
Since the young men came before them.

At the helm himself he seated,
Near the last beam of the vessel,
Steered his goodly boat in joyance,
Thus addressed the willing war-ship:
“Glide upon the trackless waters,
Sail away, my ship of magic,
Sail across the waves before thee,
Speed thou like a dancing bubble,
Like a flower upon the billows!”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Set the young men to the rowing,
Let the maidens sit in waiting.
Eagerly the youthful heroes
Bend the oars and try the row-locks,
But the distance is not lessened.
Then the minstrel, Wainamoinen,
Set the maidens to the rowing,
Let the young men rest in waiting.
Eagerly the merry maidens
Bend the aspen-oars in rowing,
But the distance is not lessened.
Then the master, Wainamoinen,
Set the old men to the rowing,
Let the youth remain in waiting.
Lustily the aged heroes
Bend and try the oars of aspen,
But the distance is not lessened.

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Grasped the oars with master-magic,
And the boat leaped o’er the surges,
Swiftly sped across the billows;
Far and wide the oars resounded,
Quickly was the distance lessened.
With a rush and roar of waters
Ilmarinen sped his vessel,
Benches, ribs, and row-locks creaking,
Oars of aspen far resounding;
Flap the sails like wings of moor-cocks,
And the prow dips like a white-swan;
In the rear it croaks like ravens,
Loud the oars and rigging rattle.

Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,
Sitting by the bending rudder,
Turns his magic vessel landward,
To a jutting promontory,
Where appears a Northland-village.
On the point stands Lemminkainen,
Kaukomieli, black magician,
Ahti, wizard of Wainola,
Wishing for the fish of Pohya,
Weeping for his fated dwelling,
For his perilous adventures,
Hard at work upon a vessel,
On the sail-yards of a fish-boat,
Near the hunger-point and island,
Near the village-home deserted.
Good the ears of the magician,
Good the wizard’s eyes for seeing;
Casts his vision to the South-east,
Turns his eyes upon the sunset,
Sees afar a wondrous rainbow,
Farther on, a cloudlet hanging;
But the bow was a deception,
And the cloudlet a delusion;
’Tis a vessel swiftly sailing,
’Tis a war-ship flying northward,
O’er the blue-back of the broad-sea,
On the far-extending waters,
At the helm the master standing,
At the oars a mighty hero.
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Do not know this wondrous vessel,
Not this well-constructed war-ship,
Coming from the distant Suomi,
Rowing for the hostile Pohya.”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Called aloud in tones of thunder
O’er the waters to the vessel;
Made the distant hills re-echo
With the music of his calling:
“Whence this vessel on the waters,
Whose the war-ship sailing hither?”

Spake the master of the vessel
To the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Who art thou from fen or forest,
Senseless wizard from the woodlands,
That thou dost not know this vessel,
Magic war-ship of Wainola?
Dost not know him at the rudder,
Nor the hero at the row-locks?”
Spake the wizard, Lemminkainen:
“Well I know the helm-director,
And I recognize the rower;
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
At the helm directs the vessel;
Ilmarinen does the rowing.
Whither is the vessel sailing,
Whither wandering, my heroes?”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“We are sailing to the Northland,
There to gain the magic Sampo,
There to get the lid in colors,
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,
From the copper-bearing mountain.”
Spake the evil Lemminkainen:
“O, thou good, old Wainamoinen,
Take me with thee to Pohyola,
Make me third of magic heroes,
Since thou goest for the Sampo,
Goest for the lid in colors;
I shall prove a valiant soldier,
When thy wisdom calls for fighting;
I am skilled in arts of warfare!”

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Gave assent to Ahti’s wishes;
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Hastened to Wainola’s war-ship,
Bringing floats of aspen-timber,
To the ships of Wainamoinen.

Thus the hero of the Northland
Speaks to reckless Lemminkainen:
“There is aspen on my vessel,
Aspen-floats in great abundance,
And the boat is heavy-laden.
Wherefore dost thou bring the aspen
To the vessel of Wainola?”
Lemminkainen gave this answer:
“Not through caution sinks a vessel,
Nor a hay-stack by its proppings;
Seas abound in hidden dangers,
Heavy storms arise and threaten
Fell destruction to the sailor
That would brave the angry billows.”
Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:
“Therefore is this warlike vessel
Built of trusty steel and copper,
Trimmed and bound in toughest iron,
That the winds may not destroy it,
May not harm my ship of magic.”




RUNE XL.
BIRTH OF THE HARP.


Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Onward steered his goodly vessel,
From the isle of Lemminkainen,
From the borders of the village;
Steered his war-ship through the waters,
Sang it o’er the ocean-billows,
Joyful steered it to Pohyola.

On the banks were maidens standing,
And the daughters spake these measures:
“List the music on the waters!
What this wonderful rejoicing,
What this singing on the billows?
Far more beautiful this singing,
This rejoicing on the waters,
Than our ears have heard in Northland.”

Wainamoinen, the magician,
Steered his wonder-vessel onward,
Steered one day along the sea-shore,
Steered the next through shallow waters,
Steered the third day through the rivers.

Then the reckless Lemminkainen
Suddenly some words remembered,
He had heard along the fire-stream
Near the cataract and whirlpool,
And these words the hero uttered:
“Cease, O cataract, thy roaring,
Cease, O waterfall, thy foaming!
Maidens of the foam and current,
Sitting on the rocks in water,
On the stone-blocks in the river,
Take the foam and white-capped billows
In your arms and still their anger,
That our ships may pass in safety!
Aged dame beneath the eddy,
Thou that livest in the sea-foam,
Swimming, rise above the waters,
Lift thy head above the whirlpool,
Gather well the foam and billows
In thine arms and still their fury,
That our ship may pass in safety!
Ye, O rocks beneath the current,
Underneath the angry waters,
Lower well your heads of danger,
Sink below our magic vessel,
That our ship may pass in safety!

“Should this prayer prove inefficient,
Kimmo, hero son of Kammo,
Bore an outlet with thine auger,
Cut a channel for this vessel
Through the rocks beneath the waters,
That our ship may pass in safety!
Should all this prove unavailing,
Hostess of the running water,
Change to moss these rocky ledges,
Change this vessel to an air-bag,
That between these rocks and billows
It may float, and pass in safety!

“Virgin of the sacred whirlpool,
Thou whose home is in the river,
Spin from flax of strongest fiber,
Spin a thread of crimson color,
Draw it gently through the water,
That the thread our ship may follow,
And our vessel pass in safety!
Goddess of the helm, thou daughter
Of the ocean-winds and sea-foam,
Take thy helm endowed with mercy,
Guide our vessel through these dangers,
Hasten through these floods enchanted,
Passing by the house of envy,
By the gates of the enchanters,
That our ship may pass in safety!

“Should this prayer prove inefficient,
Ukko, Ruler of creation,
Guide our vessel with thy fire-sword,
Guide it with thy blade of lightning,
Through the dangers of these rapids,
Through the cataract and whirlpool,
That our ship may pass in safety!”

Thereupon old Wainamoinen
Steered his boat through winds and waters,
Through the rocky chinks and channels,
Through the surges wildly tossing;
And the vessel passed in safety
Through the dangers of the current,
Through the sacred stream and whirlpool.
As it gains the open waters,
Gains at length the broad-lake’s bosom,
Suddenly its motion ceases,
On some object firmly anchored.
Thereupon young Ilmarinen,
With the aid of Lemminkainen,
Plunges in the lake the rudder,
Struggles with the aid of magic;
But he cannot move the vessel,
Cannot free it from its moorings.

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Thus addresses his companion:
“O thou hero, Lemminkainen,
Stoop and look beneath this war-ship,
See on what this boat is anchored,
See on what our craft is hanging,
In this broad expanse of water,
In the broad-lake’s deepest soundings,
If upon some rock or tree-snag,
Or upon some other hindrance.”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Looked beneath the magic vessel,
Peering through the crystal waters,
Spake and these the words he uttered:
“Does not rest upon a sand-bar,
Nor upon a rock, nor tree-snag,
But upon the back and shoulders
Of the mighty pike of Northland,
On the fin-bones of the monster.”

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:
“Many things we find in water,
Rocks, and trees, and fish, and sea-duck;
Are we on the pike’s broad shoulders,
On the fin-bones of the monster,
Pierce the waters with thy broadsword,
Cut the monster into pieces.”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen,
Reckless wizard, filled with courage,
Pulls his broadsword from his girdle,
From its sheath, the bone-divider,
Strikes with might of magic hero,
Headlong falls into the water;
And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Lifts the wizard from the river,
Speaks these words to dripping Ahti:
“Accidents will come to mortals,
Accidents will come to heroes,
By the hundreds, by the thousands,
Even to the gods above us!”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Drew his broadsword from his girdle,
From its sheath his blade of honor,
Tried to slay the pike of Northland
With the weapon of his forging;
But he broke his sword in pieces,
Did not harm the water-monster.

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Thus addresses his companions:
“Poor apologies for heroes!
When occasion calls for victors,
When we need some great magician,
Need a hero filled with valor,
Then the arm that comes is feeble,
And the mind insane or witless,
Strength and reason gone to others!”

Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,
Miracle of strength and wisdom,
Draws his fire-sword from his girdle,
Wields the mighty blade of magic,
Strikes the waters as the lightning,
Strikes the pike beneath the vessel,
And impales the mighty monster;
Raises him above the surface,
In the air the pike he circles,
Cuts the monster into pieces;
To the water falls the pike-tail,
To the ship the head and body;
Easily the ship moves onward.

Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
To the shore directs his vessel,
On the strand the boat he anchors,
Looks in every nook and corner
For the fragments of the monster;
Gathers well the parts together,
Speaks these words to those about him:
“Let the oldest of the heroes
Slice for me the pike of Northland,
Slice the fish to fitting morsels.”

Answered all the men and heroes,
And the maidens spake, assenting:
“Worthier the catcher’s fingers,
Wainamoinen’s hands are sacred!”

Thereupon the wise magician
Drew a fish-knife from his girdle,
Sliced the pike to fitting morsels,
Spake again to those about him:
“Let the youngest of the maidens
Cook for me the pike of Northland,
Set for me a goodly dinner!”

All the maidens quick responded,
All the virgins vied in cooking;
Neither could outdo the other,
Thus the pike was rendered toothsome.
Feasted all the old magicians,
Feasted all the younger heroes,
Feasted all the men and maidens;
On the rocks were left the fish-bones,
Only relics of their feasting.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Looked upon the pile of fragments,
On the fish-bones looked and pondered,
Spake these words in meditation:
“Wondrous things might be constructed
From the relics of this monster,
Were they in the blacksmith’s furnace,
In the hands of the magician,
In the hands of Ilmarinen.”
Spake the blacksmith of Wainola:
“Nothing fine can be constructed
From the bones and teeth of fishes
By the skillful forger-artist,
By the hands of the magician.”
These the words of Wainamoinen:
“Something wondrous might be builded
From these jaws, and teeth, and fish-bones;
Might a magic harp be fashioned,
Could an artist be discovered
That could shape them to my wishes.”

But he found no fish-bone artist
That could shape the harp of joyance
From the relics of their feasting,
From the jaw-bones of the monster,
To the will of the magician.
Thereupon wise Wainamoinen
Set himself at work designing;
Quick became a fish-bone artist,
Made a harp of wondrous beauty,
Lasting joy and pride of Suomi.
Whence the harp’s enchanting arches?
From the jaw-bones of the monster.
Whence the necessary harp-pins?
From the pike-teeth firmly fastened.
Whence the sweetly singing harp-strings?
From the tail of Lempo’s stallion.
Thus was born the harp of magic
From the mighty pike of Northland,
From the relies from the feasting
Of the heroes of Wainola.
All the young men came to view it,
All the aged with their children,
Mothers with their beauteous daughters,
Maidens with their golden tresses;
All the people on the islands
Came to view the harp of joyance,
Pride and beauty of the Northland.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Let the aged try the harp-strings,
Gave it to the young magicians,
To the dames and to their daughters,
To the maidens, silver-tinselled,
To the singers of Wainola.
When the young men touched the harp-strings,
Then arose the notes of discord;
When the aged played upon it,
Dissonance their only music.
Spake the wizard, Lemminkainen:
“O ye witless, worthless children,
O ye senseless, useless maidens,
O ye wisdom-lacking heroes,
Cannot play this harp of magic,
Cannot touch the notes of concord!
Give to me this thing of beauty,
Hither bring the harp of fish-bones,
Let me try my skillful fingers.”
Lemminkainen touched the harp-strings,
Carefully the strings adjusted,
Turned the harp in all directions,
Fingered all the strings in sequence,
Played the instrument of wonder,
But it did not speak in concord,
Did not sing the notes of joyance.
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“There is none among these maidens,
None among these youthful heroes,
None among the old magicians
That can play the harp of magic,
Touch the notes of joy and pleasure.
Let us take the harp to Pohya,
There to find a skillful player
That can touch the strings in concord.”

Then they sailed to Sariola,
To Pohyola took the wonder,
There to find the harp a master.
All the heroes of Pohyola,
All the boys and all the maidens,
Ancient dames, and bearded minstrels,
Vainly touched the harp of beauty.

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Took the harp-strings in her fingers;
All the youth of Sariola,
Youth of every tribe and station,
Vainly touched the harp of fish-bone;
Could not find the notes of joyance,
Dissonance their only pleasure;
Shrieked the harp-strings like the whirlwinds,
All the tones wore harsh and frightful.

In a corner slept a blind man,
Lay a gray-beard on the oven,
Rousing from his couch of slumber,
Murmured thus within his corner:
“Cease at once this wretched playing,
Make an end of all this discord;
It benumbs mine ears for hearing,
Racks my brain, despoils my senses,
Robs me of the sweets of sleeping.
If the harp of Suomi’s people
True delight cannot engender,
Cannot bring the notes of pleasure,
Cannot sing to sleep the aged,
Cast the thing upon the waters,
Sink it in the deeps of ocean,
Take it back to Kalevala,
To the home of him that made it,
To the hands of its creator.”

Thereupon the harp made answer,
To the blind man sang these measures:
“Shall not fall upon the waters,
Shall not sink within the ocean;
I will play for my creator,
Sing in melody and concord
In the fingers of my master.”

Carefully the harp was carried
To the artist that had made it,
To the hands of its creator,
To the feet of Wainamoinen.




RUNE XLI.
WAINAMOINEN’S HARP-SONGS.


Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
Laves his hands to snowy whiteness,
Sits upon the rock of joyance,
On the stone of song he settles,
On the mount of silver clearness,
On the summit, golden colored;
Takes the harp by him created,
In his hands the harp of fish-bone,
With his knee the arch supporting,
Takes the harp-strings in his fingers,
Speaks these words to those assembled:
“Hither come, ye Northland people,
Come and listen to my playing,
To the harp’s entrancing measures,
To my songs of joy and gladness.”

Then the singer of Wainola
Took the harp of his creation,
Quick adjusting, sweetly tuning,
Deftly plied his skillful fingers
To the strings that he had fashioned.
Now was gladness rolled on gladness,
And the harmony of pleasure
Echoed from the hills and mountains:
Added singing to his playing,
Out of joy did joy come welling,
Now resounded marvelous music,
All of Northland stopped and listened.
Every creature in the forest,
All the beasts that haunt the woodlands,
On their nimble feet came bounding,
Came to listen to his playing,
Came to hear his songs of joyance.
Leaped the squirrels from the branches,
Merrily from birch to aspen;
Climbed the ermines on the fences,
O’er the plains the elk-deer bounded,
And the lynxes purred with pleasure;
Wolves awoke in far-off swamp-lands,
Bounded o’er the marsh and heather,
And the bear his den deserted,
Left his lair within the pine-wood,
Settled by a fence to listen,
Leaned against the listening gate-posts,
But the gate-posts yield beneath him;
Now he climbs the fir-tree branches
That he may enjoy and wonder,
Climbs and listens to the music
Of the harp of Wainamoinen.

Tapiola’s wisest senior,
Metsola’s most noble landlord,
And of Tapio, the people,
Young and aged, men and maidens,
Flew like red-deer up the mountains
There to listen to the playing,
To the harp of Wainamoinen.
Tapiola’s wisest mistress,
Hostess of the glen and forest,
Robed herself in blue and scarlet,
Bound her limbs with silken ribbons,
Sat upon the woodland summit,
On the branches of a birch-tree,
There to listen to the playing,
To the high-born hero’s harping,
To the songs of Wainamoinen.

All the birds that fly in mid-air
Fell like snow-flakes from the heavens,
Flew to hear the minstrel’s playing,
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen.
Eagles in their lofty eyrie
Heard the songs of the enchanter;
Swift they left their unfledged young ones,
Flew and perched around the minstrel.
From the heights the hawks descended,
From the clouds down swooped the falcon,
Ducks arose from inland waters,
Swans came gliding from the marshes;
Tiny finches, green and golden,
Flew in flocks that darkened sunlight,
Came in myriads to listen,
Perched upon the head and shoulders
Of the charming Wainamoinen,
Sweetly singing to the playing
Of the ancient bard and minstrel.
And the daughters of the welkin,
Nature’s well-beloved daughters,
Listened all in rapt attention;
Some were seated on the rainbow,
Some upon the crimson cloudlets,
Some upon the dome of heaven.

In their hands the Moon’s fair daughters
Held their weaving-combs of silver;
In their hands the Sun’s sweet maidens
Grasped the handles of their distaffs,
Weaving with their golden shuttles,
Spinning from their silver spindles,
On the red rims of the cloudlets,
On the bow of many colors.
As they hear the minstrel playing,
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen,
Quick they drop their combs of silver,
Drop the spindles from their fingers,
And the golden threads are broken,
Broken are the threads of silver.

All the fish in Suomi-waters
Heard the songs of the magician,
Came on flying fins to listen
To the harp of Wainamoinen.
Came the trout with graceful motions,
Water-dogs with awkward movements,
From the water-cliffs the salmon,
From the sea-caves came the whiting,
From the deeper caves the bill-fish;
Came the pike from beds of sea-fern,
Little fish with eyes of scarlet,
Leaning on the reeds and rushes,
With their heads above the surface;
Came to bear the harp of joyance,
Hear the songs of the enchanter.

Ahto, king of all the waters,
Ancient king with beard of sea-grass,
Raised his head above the billows,
In a boat of water-lilies,
Glided to the coast in silence,
Listened to the wondrous singing,
To the harp of Wainamoinen.
These the words the sea-king uttered:
“Never have I heard such playing,
Never heard such strains of music,
Never since the sea was fashioned,
As the songs of this enchanter,
This sweet singer, Wainamoinen.”

Satko’s daughters from the blue-deep,
Sisters of the wave-washed ledges,
On the colored strands were sitting,
Smoothing out their sea-green tresses
With the combs of molten silver,
With their silver-handled brushes,
Brushes forged with golden bristles.
When they hear the magic playing,
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen,
Fall their brushes on the billows,
Fall their combs with silver handles
To the bottom of the waters,
Unadorned their heads remaining,
And uncombed their sea-green tresses.

Came the hostess of the waters,
Ancient hostess robed in flowers,
Rising from her deep sea-castle,
Swimming to the shore in wonder,
Listened to the minstrel’s playing,
To the harp of Wainamoinen.
As the magic tones re-echoed,
As the singer’s song out-circled,
Sank the hostess into slumber,
On the rocks of many colors,
On her watery couch of joyance,
Deep the sleep that settled o’er her.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Played one day and then a second,
Played the third from morn till even.
There was neither man nor hero,
Neither ancient dame, nor maiden,
Not in Metsola a daughter,
Whom he did not touch to weeping;
Wept the young, and wept the aged,
Wept the mothers, wept the daughters
Wept the warriors and heroes
At the music of his playing,
At the songs of the magician.

Wainamoinen’s tears came flowing,
Welling from the master’s eyelids,
Pearly tear-drops coursing downward,
Larger than the whortle-berries,
Finer than the pearls of ocean,
Smoother than the eggs of moor-hens,
Brighter than the eyes of swallows.
From his eyes the tear-drops started,
Flowed adown his furrowed visage,
Falling from his beard in streamlets,
Trickled on his heaving bosom,
Streaming o’er his golden girdle,
Coursing to his garment’s border,
Then beneath his shoes of ermine,
Flowing on, and flowing ever,
Part to earth for her possession,
Part to water for her portion.
As the tear-drops fall and mingle,
Form they streamlets from the eyelids
Of the minstrel, Wainamoinen,
To the blue-mere’s sandy margin,
To the deeps of crystal waters,
Lost among the reeds and rushes.
Spake at last the ancient minstrel:
“Is there one in all this concourse,
One in all this vast assembly
That can gather up my tear-drops
From the deep, pellucid waters?”

Thus the younger heroes answered,
Answered thus the bearded seniors:
“There is none in all this concourse,
None in all this vast assembly,
That can gather up thy tear-drops
From the deep, pellucid waters.”
Spake again wise Wainamoinen:
“He that gathers up my tear-drops
From the deeps of crystal waters
Shall receive a beauteous plumage.”

Came a raven, flying, croaking,
And the minstrel thus addressed him:
“Bring, O raven, bring my tear-drops
From the crystal lake’s abysses;
I will give thee beauteous plumage,
Recompense for golden service.”
But the raven failed his master.

Came a duck upon the waters,
And the hero thus addressed him:
“Bring, O water-bird, my tear-drops;
Often thou dost dive the deep-sea,
Sink thy bill upon the bottom
Of the waters thou dost travel;
Dive again my tears to gather,
I will give thee beauteous plumage,
Recompense for golden service.”

Thereupon the duck departed,
Hither, thither, swam, and circled,
Dived beneath the foam and billow,
Gathered Wainamoinen’s tear-drops
From the blue-sea’s pebbly bottom,
From the deep, pellucid waters;
Brought them to the great magician,
Beautifully formed and colored,
Glistening in the silver sunshine,
Glimmering in the golden moonlight,
Many-colored as the rainbow,
Fitting ornaments for heroes,
Jewels for the maids of beauty.
This the origin of sea-pearls,
And the blue-duck’s beauteous plumage.




RUNE XLII.
CAPTURE OF THE SAMPO.


Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
With the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
With the reckless son of Lempo,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
On the sea’s smooth plain departed,
On the far-extending waters,
To the village, cold and dreary,
To the never-pleasant Northland,
Where the heroes fall and perish.
Ilmarinen led the rowers
On one side the magic war-ship,
And the reckless Lemminkainen
Led the rowers on the other.
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Laid his hand upon the rudder,
Steered his vessel o’er the waters,
Through the foam and angry billows
To Pohyola’s place of landing,
To the cylinders of copper,
Where the war-ships lie at anchor.

When they had arrived at Pohya,
When their journey they had ended,
On the land they rolled their vessel,
On the copper-banded rollers,
Straightway journeyed to the village,
Hastened to the halls and hamlets
Of the dismal Sariola.

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Thus addressed the stranger-heroes:
“Magic heroes of Wainola,
What the tidings ye are bringing
To the people of my village?”

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Gave this answer to the hostess:
“All the hosts of Kalevala
Are inquiring for the Sampo,
Asking for the lid in colors;
Hither have these heroes journeyed
To divide the priceless treasure.”
Thus the hostess spake in answer:
“No one would divide a partridge,
Nor a squirrel, with three heroes;
Wonderful the magic Sampo,
Plenty does it bring to Northland;
And the colored lid re-echoes
From the copper-bearing mountains,
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,
To the joy of its possessors.”

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:
“If thou wilt not share the Sampo,
Give to us an equal portion,
We will take it to Wainola,
With its lid of many colors,
Take by force the hope of Pohya.”

Thereupon the Northland hostess
Angry grew and sighed for vengeance;
Called her people into council,
Called the hosts of Sariola,
Heroes with their trusted broadswords,
To destroy old Wainamoinen
With his people of the Northland.

Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
Hastened to his harp of fish-bone,
And began his magic playing;
All of Pohya stopped and listened,
Every warrior was silenced
By the notes of the magician;
Peaceful-minded grew the soldiers,
All the maidens danced with pleasure,
While the heroes fell to weeping,
And the young men looked in wonder.

Wainamoinen plays unceasing,
Plays the maidens into slumber,
Plays to sleep the young and aged,
All of Northland sleeps and listens.
Wise and wondrous Wainamoinen,
The eternal bard and singer,
Searches in his pouch of leather,
Draws therefrom his slumber-arrows,
Locks the eyelids of the sleepers,
Of the heroes of Pohyola,
Sings and charms to deeper slumber
All the warriors of the Northland.
Then the heroes of Wainola
Hasten to obtain the Sampo,
To procure the lid in colors
From the copper-bearing mountains.
From behind nine locks of copper,
In the stone-berg of Pohyola.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Then began his wondrous singing,
Sang in gentle tones of magic,
At the entrance to the mountain,
At the border of the stronghold;
Trembled all the rocky portals,
And the iron-banded pillars
Fell and crumbled at his singing.

Ilmarinen, magic blacksmith,
Well anointed all the hinges,
All the bars and locks anointed,
And the bolts flew back by magic,
All the gates unlocked in silence,
Opened for the great magician.
Spake the minstrel Wainamoinen:
“O thou daring Lemminkainen,
Friend of mine in times of trouble,
Enter thou within the mountain,
Bring away the wondrous Sampo,
Bring away the lid in colors!”

Quick the reckless Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Ever ready for a venture,
Hastens to the mountain-caverns,
There to find the famous Sampo,
There to get the lid in colors;
Strides along with conscious footsteps,
Thus himself he vainly praises:
“Great am I and full of glory,
Wonder-hero, son of Ukko,
I will bring away the Sampo,
Turn about the lid in colors,
Turn it on its magic hinges!”

Lemminkainen finds the wonder,
Finds the Sampo in the mountain,
Labors long with strength heroic,
Tugs with might and main to turn it;
Motionless remains the treasure,
Deeper sinks the lid in colors,
For the roots have grown about it,
Grown nine fathoms deep in sand-earth.

Lived a mighty ox in Northland,
Powerful in bone and sinew,
Beautiful in form and color,
Horns the length of seven fathoms,
Mouth and eyes of wondrous beauty.

Lemminkainen, reckless hero,
Harnesses the ox in pasture,
Takes the master-plow of Pohya,
Plows the roots about the Sampo,
Plows around the lid in colors,
And the sacred Sampo loosens,
Falls the colored lid in silence.
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen
Brings the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Brings the daring Lemminkainen,
Lastly brings the magic Sampo,
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,
From the copper-bearing mountain,
Hides it in his waiting vessel,
In the war-ship of Wainola.

Wainamoinen called his people,
Called his crew of men and maidens,
Called together all his heroes,
Rolled his vessel to the water,
Into billowy deeps and dangers.
Spake the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:
“Whither shall we take the Sampo,
Whither take the lid in colors,
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,
From this evil spot of Northland?”

Wainamoinen, wise and faithful,
Gave this answer to the question:
“Thither shall we take the Sampo,
Thither take the lid in colors,
To the fog-point on the waters,
To the island forest-covered;
There the treasure may be hidden,
May remain in peace for ages,
Free from trouble, free from danger,
Where the sword will not molest it.”

Then the minstrel, Wainamoinen,
Joyful, left the Pohya borders,
Homeward sailed, and happy-hearted,
Spake these measures on departing:
“Turn, O man-of-war, from Pohya,
Turn thy back upon the strangers,
Turn thou to my distant country!
Rock, O winds, my magic vessel,
Homeward drive my ship, O billows,
Lend the rowers your assistance,
Give the oarsmen easy labor,
On this vast expanse of waters!
Give me of thine oars, O Ahto,
Lend thine aid, O King of sea-waves,
Guide as with thy helm in safety,
Lay thy hand upon the rudder,
And direct our war-ship homeward;
Let the hooks of metal rattle
O’er the surging of the billows,
On the white-capped waves’ commotion.”

Then the master, Wainamoinen,
Guided home his willing vessel;
And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
With the lively Lemminkainen,
Led the mighty host of rowers,
And the war-ship glided homeward
O’er the sea’s unruffled surface,
O’er the mighty waste of waters.
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“Once before I rode these billows,
There were viands for the heroes,
There was singing for the maidens;
But to-day I hear no singing,
Hear no songs upon the vessel,
Hear no music on the waters.”

Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
Answered thus wild Lemminkainen:
“Let none sing upon the blue-sea,
On the waters, no rejoicing;
Singing would prolong our journey,
Songs disturb the host of rowers;
Soon will die the silver sunlight,
Darkness soon will overtake us,
On this evil waste of waters,
On this blue-sea, smooth and level.”
These the words of Lemminkainen:
“Time will fly on equal pinions
Whether we have songs or silence;
Soon will disappear the daylight,
And the night as quickly follow,
Whether we be sad or joyous.”

Wainamoinen, the magician,
O’er the blue backs of the billows,
Steered one day, and then a second,
Steered the third from morn till even,
When the wizard, Lemminkainen,
Once again addressed the master:
“Why wilt thou, O famous minstrel,
Sing no longer for thy people,
Since the Sampo thou hast captured,
Captured too the lid in colors?”
These the words of Wainamoinen:
“’Tis not well to sing too early!
Time enough for songs of joyance
When we see our home-land mansions,
When our journeyings have ended!”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:
“At the helm, if I were sitting,
I would sing at morn and evening,
Though my voice has little sweetness;
Since thy songs are not forthcoming
Listen to my wondrous singing!”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen,
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,
Raised his voice above the waters,
O’er the sea his song resounded;
But his measures were discordant,
And his notes were harsh and frightful.
Sang the wizard, Lemminkainen,
Screeched the reckless Kaukomieli,
Till the mighty war-ship trembled;
Far and wide was heard his singing,
Heard his songs upon the waters,
Heard within the seventh village,
Heard beyond the seven oceans.

Sat a crane within the rushes,
On a hillock clothed in verdure,
And the crane his toes was counting;
Suddenly he heard the singing
Of the wizard, Lemminkainen;
And the bird was justly frightened
At the songs of the magician.
Then with horrid voice, and screeching,
Flew the crane across the broad-sea
To the lakes of Sariola,
O’er Pohyola’s hills and hamlets,
Screeching, screaming, over Northland,
Till the people of the darkness
Were awakened from their slumbers.

Louhi hastens to her hurdles,
Hastens to her droves of cattle,
Hastens also to her garners,
Counts her herds, inspects her store-house;
Undisturbed she finds her treasures.

Quick she journeys to the entrance
To the copper-bearing mountain,
Speaks these words as she approaches:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated,
Woe to Louhi, broken-hearted!
Here the tracks of the destroyers,
All my locks and bolts are broken
By the hands of cruel strangers!
Broken are my iron hinges,
Open stand the mountain-portals
Leading to the Northland-treasure.
Has Pohyola lost her Sampo?”

Then she hastened to the chambers
Where the Sampo had been grinding;
But she found the chambers empty,
Lid and Sampo gone to others,
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,
From behind nine locks of copper,
In the copper-bearing mountain.

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Angry grew and cried for vengeance;
As she found her fame departing,
Found her strength fast disappearing,
Thus addressed the sea-fog virgin:
“Daughter of the morning-vapors,
Sift thy fogs from distant cloud-land,
Sift the thick air from the heavens,
Sift thy vapors from the ether,
On the blue-back of the broad-sea,
On the far extending waters,
That the ancient Wainamoinen,
Friend of ocean-wave and billow,
May not baffle his pursuers!

“Should this prayer prove unavailing,
Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,
Raise thy head above the billows,
And destroy Wainola’s heroes,
Sink them to thy deep sea-castles,
There devour them at thy pleasure;
Bring thou back the golden Sampo
To the people of Pohyola!

“Should these words be ineffective,
Ukko, mightiest of rulers,
Golden king beyond the welkin,
Sitting on a throne of silver,
Fill thy skies with heavy storm-clouds,
Call thy fleetest winds about thee,
Send them o’er the seven broad-seas,
There to find the fleeing vessel,
That the ancient Wainamoinen
May not baffle his pursuers!”

Quick the virgin of the vapors
Breathed a fog upon the waters,
Made it settle on the war-ship
Of the heroes of the Northland,
Held the minstrel, Wainamoinen,
Anchored in the fog and darkness;
Bound him one day, then a second,
Then a third till dawn of morning,
In the middle of the blue-sea,
Whence he could not flee in safety
From the wrath of his pursuers.

When the third night had departed,
Resting in the sea, and helpless,
Wainamoinen spake as follows:
“Not a man of strength and courage,
Not the weakest of the heroes,
Who upon the sea will suffer,
Sink and perish in the vapors,
Perish in the fog and darkness!”

With his sword he smote the billows,
From his magic blade flowed honey;
Quick the vapor breaks, and rises,
Leaves the waters clear for rowing;
Far extend the sky and waters,
Large the ring of the horizon,
And the troubled sea enlarges.

Time had journeyed little distance,
Scarce a moment had passed over,
When they heard a mighty roaring,
Heard a roaring and a rushing
Near the border of the vessel,
Where the foam was shooting skyward
O’er the boat of Wainamoinen.
Straightway youthful Ilmarinen
Sank in gravest apprehension,
From his cheeks the blood departed;
Pulled his cap down o’er his forehead,
Shook and trembled with emotion.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Casts his eyes upon the waters
Near the broad rim of his war-ship;
There perceives an ocean-wonder
With his head above the sea-foam.

Wainamoinen, brave and mighty,
Seizes quick the water-monster,
Lifts him by his ears and questions:
“Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,
Why art rising from the blue-sea?
Wherefore dost thou leave thy castle,
Show thyself to mighty heroes,
To the heroes of Wainola?”

Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,
Ocean monster, manifested
Neither pleasure, nor displeasure,
Was not in the least affrighted,
Did not give the hero answer.

Whereupon the ancient minstrel,
Asked the second time the monster,
Urgently inquired a third time:
“Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,
Why art rising from the waters,
Wherefore dost thou leave the blue-sea?”
Iku-Turso gave this answer:
“For this cause I left my castle
Underneath the rolling billows:
Came I here with the intention
To destroy the Kalew-heroes,
And return the magic Sampo
To the people of Pohyola.
If thou wilt restore my freedom,
Spare my life from pain and sorrow,
I will quick retrace my journey,
Nevermore to show my visage
To the people of Wainola,
Never while the moonlight glimmers
On the hills of Kalevala!”

Then the singer, Wainamoinen,
Freed the monster, Iku-Turso,
Sent him to his deep sea-castles,
Spake these words to him departing:
“Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,
Nevermore arise from ocean,
Nevermore let Northland-heroes
See thy face above the waters!”

Nevermore has Iku-Turso
Risen to the ocean-level;
Never since have Northland sailors
Seen the head of this sea-monster.

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Onward rowed his goodly vessel,
Journeyed but a little distance,
Scarce a moment had passed over,
When the King of all creators,
Mighty Ukko of the heavens,
Made the winds blow full of power,
Made the storms arise in fury,
Made them rage upon the waters.
From the west the winds came roaring,
From the north-east came in anger,
Winds came howling from the south-west,
Came the winds from all directions,
In their fury, rolling, roaring,
Tearing branches from the lindens,
Hurling needles from the pine-trees,
Blowing flowers from the heather,
Grasses blowing from the meadow,
Tearing up the very bottom
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea.
Roared the winds and lashed the waters
Till the waves were white with fury;
Tossed the war-ship high in ether,
Tossed away the harp of fish-bone,
Magic harp of Wainamoinen,
To the joy of King Wellamo,
To the pleasure of his people,
To the happiness of Ahto,
Ahto, rising from his caverns,
On the floods beheld his people
Carry off the harp of magic
To their home below the billows.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Heavy-hearted, spake these measures:
“I have lost what I created,
I have lost the harp of joyance;
Now my strength has gone to others,
All my pleasure too departed,
All my hope and comfort vanished!
Nevermore the harp of fish-bone
Will enchant the hosts of Suomi!”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Sorrow-laden, spake as follows:
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!
Would that I had never journeyed
On these waters filled with dangers,
On the rolling waste before me,
In this war-ship false and feeble.
Winds and storms have I encountered,
Wretched days of toil and trouble,
I have witnessed in the Northland;
Never have I met such dangers
On the land, nor on the ocean,
Never in my hero life-time!”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Spake and these the words he uttered:
“Weep no more, my goodly comrades,
In my bark let no one murmur;
Weeping cannot mend disaster,
Tears can never still misfortune,
Mourning cannot save from evil.

“Sea, command thy warring forces,
Bid thy children cease their fury!
Ahto, still thy surging billows!
Sink, Wellamo, to thy slumber,
That our boat may move in safety.
Rise, ye storm-winds, to your kingdoms,
Lift your heads above the waters,
To the regions of your kindred,
To your people and dominions;
Cut the trees within the forest,
Bend the lindens of the valley,
Let our vessel sail in safety!”

Then the reckless Lemminkainen,
Handsome wizard, Kaukomieli,
Spake these words in supplication:
“Come, O eagle, Turyalander,
Bring three feathers from thy pinions,
Three, O raven, three, O eagle,
To protect this bark from evil!”

All the heroes of Wainola
Call their forces to the rescue,
And repair the sinking vessel.
By the aid of master-magic,
Wainamoinen saved his war-ship,
Saved his people from destruction,
Well repaired his ship to battle
With the roughest seas of Northland;
Steers his mighty boat in safety
Through the perils of the whirlpool,
Through the watery deeps and dangers.




RUNE XLIII.
THE SAMPO LOST IN THE SEA.


Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Called her many tribes together,
Gave the archers bows and arrows,
Gave her brave men spears and broadswords;
Fitted out her mightiest war-ship,
In the vessel placed her army,
With their swords a hundred heroes,
With their bows a thousand archers;
Quick erected masts and sail-yards,
On the masts her sails of linen
Hanging like the clouds of heaven,
Like the white-clouds in the ether;
Sailed across the seas of Pohya,
To re-take the wondrous Sampo
From the heroes of Wainola.

Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Sailed across the deep, blue waters,
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:
“O thou daring son of Lempo,
Best of all my friends and heroes,
Mount the highest of the topmasts,
Look before you into ether,
Look behind you at the heavens,
Well examine the horizon,
Whether clear or filled with trouble.”

Climbed the daring Lemminkainen,
Ever ready for a venture,
To the highest of the mastheads;
Looked he eastward, also westward,
Looked he northward, also southward,
Then addressed wise Wainamoinen:
“Clear the sky appears before me,
But behind a dark horizon;
In the north a cloud is rising,
And a longer cloud at north-west.”
Wainamoinen thus made answer:
“Art thou speaking truth or fiction?
I am fearful that the war-ships
Of Pohyola are pursuing;
Look again with keener vision.”

Thereupon wild Lemminkainen
Looked again and spake as follows:
“In the distance seems a forest,
In the south appears an island,
Aspen-groves with falcons laden,
Alders laden with the wood-grouse.”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Surely thou art speaking falsehood;
’Tis no forest in the distance,
Neither aspen, birch, nor alders,
Laden with the grouse, or falcon;
I am fearful that Pohyola
Follows with her magic armies;
Look again with keener vision.”

Then the daring Lemminkainen
Looked the third time from the topmast,
Spake and these the words he uttered:
“From the north a boat pursues us,
Driven by a hundred rowers,
Carrying a thousand heroes!”

Knew at last old Wainamoinen,
Knew the truth of his inquiry,
Thus addressed his fleeing people:
“Row, O blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Row, O mighty Lemminkainen,
Row, all ye my noble oarsmen,
That our boat may skim the waters,
May escape from our pursuers!”

Rowed the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Rowed the mighty Lemminkainen,
With them rowed the other heroes;
Heavily groaned the helm of birch-wood,
Loudly rattled all the row-locks;
All the vessel shook and trembled,
Like a cataract it thundered
As it plowed the waste of waters,
Tossing sea-foam to the heavens.
Strongly rowed Wainola’s forces,
Strongly were their arms united;
But the distance did not widen
Twixt the boat and their pursuers.

Quick the hero, Wainamoinen,
Saw misfortune hanging over,
Saw destruction in the distance;
Heavy-hearted, long reflecting,
Trouble-laden, spake as follows:
“Only is there one salvation,
Know one miracle for safety!”

Then he grasped his box of tinder,
From the box he took a flint-stone,
Of the tinder took some fragments,
Cast the fragments on the waters,
Spake these words of master-magic.
“Let from these arise a mountain
From the bottom of the deep-sea,
Let a rock arise in water,
That the war-ship of Pohyola,
With her thousand men and heroes,
May be wrecked upon the summit,
By the aid of surging billows.”

Instantly a reef arises,
In the sea springs up a mountain,
Eastward, westward, through the waters.
Came the war-ship of the Northland,
Through the floods the boat came steering,
Sailed against the mountain-ledges,
Fastened on the rocks in water,
Wrecked upon the Mount of Magic.
In the deep-sea fell the topmasts,
Fell the sails upon the billows,
Carried by the winds and waters
O’er the waves of toil and trouble.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Tries to free her sinking vessel,
Tries to rescue from destruction;
But she cannot raise the war-ship,
Firmly fixed upon the mountain;
Shattered are the ribs and rudder,
Ruined is the ship of Pohya.

Then the hostess of the Northland,
Much disheartened, spake as follows:
“Where the force, in earth or heaven,
That will help a soul in trouble?”

Quick she changes form and feature,
Makes herself another body;
Takes five sharpened scythes of iron,
Also takes five goodly sickles,
Shapes them into eagle-talons;
Takes the body of the vessel,
Makes the frame-work of an eagle;
Takes the vessel’s ribs and flooring,
Makes them into wings and breastplate;
For the tail she shapes the rudder;
In the wings she plants a thousand
Seniors with their bows and arrows;
Sets a thousand magic heroes
In the body, armed with broadswords;
In the tail a hundred archers,
With their deadly spears and cross-bows,
Thus the bird is hero-feathered.
Quick she spreads her mighty pinions,
Rises as a monster-eagle,
Flies on high, and soars, and circles;
With one wing she sweeps the heavens,
While the other sweeps the waters.
Spake the hero’s ocean-mother:
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Turn thy vision to the north-east,
Cast thine eyes upon the sunrise,
Look behind thy fleeing vessel,
See the eagle of misfortune!”

Wainamoinen turned as bidden,
Turned his vision to the north-east,
Cast his eyes upon the sunrise,
There beheld the Northland-hostess,
Wicked witch of Sariola,
Flying as a monster-eagle,
Swooping on his mighty war-ship;
Flies and perches on the topmast,
On the sail-yards firmly settles;
Nearly overturns the vessel
Of the heroes of Wainola,
Underneath the weight of envy.

Then the hero, Ilmarinen,
Turned to Ukko as his refuge,
Thus entreated his Creator:
“Ukko, thou O God in heaven,
Thou Creator full of mercy,
Guard us from impending danger,
That thy children may not perish,
May not meet with fell destruction.
Hither bring thy magic fire-cloak,
That thy people, thus protected,
May resist Pohyola’s forces,
Well may fight against the hostess
Of the dismal Sariola,
May not fall before her weapons,
May not in the deep-sea perish!”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:
“O thou hostess of Pohyola,
Wilt thou now divide the Sampo,
On the fog-point in the water,
On the island forest-covered?”
Thus the Northland hostess answered:
“I will not divide the Sampo,
Not with thee, thou evil wizard,
Not with wicked Wainamoinen!”

Quick the mighty eagle, Louhi,
Swoops upon the lid in colors,
Grasps the Sampo in her talons;
But the daring Lemminkainen
Straightway draws his blade of battle,
Draws his broadsword from his girdle,
Cleaves the talons of the eagle,
One toe only is uninjured,
Speaks these magic words of conquest:
“Down, ye spears, and down, ye broadswords,
Down, ye thousand witless heroes,
Down, ye feathered hosts of Louhi!”

Spake the hostess of Pohyola,
Calling, screeching, from the sail-yards:
“O thou faithless Lemminkainen,
Wicked wizard, Kaukomieli,
To deceive thy trusting mother!
Thou didst give to her thy promise,
Not to go to war for ages,
Not to war for sixty summers,
Though desire for gold impels thee,
Though thou wishest gold and silver!

Wainamoinen, ancient hero,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
Thinking he had met destruction,
Snatched the rudder from the waters,
With it smote the monster-eagle,
Smote the eagle’s iron talons,
Smote her countless feathered heroes.
From her breast her hosts descended,
Spearmen fell upon the billows,
From the wings descend a thousand,
From the tail, a hundred archers.
Swoops again the bird of Pohya
To the bottom of the vessel,
Like the hawk from birch or aspen,
Like the falcon from the linden;
Grasps the Sampo with one talon,
Drags the treasure to the waters,
Drops the magic lid in colors
From the red rim of the war-ship
To the bottom of the deep-sea,
Where the Sampo breaks in pieces,
Scatters through the Alue-waters,
In the mighty deeps for ages,
To increase the ocean’s treasures,
Treasures for the hosts of Ahto.
Nevermore will there be wanting
Richness for the Ahto-nation,
Never while the moonlight brightens
On the waters of the Northland.

Many fragments of the Sampo
Floated on the purple waters,
On the waters deep and boundless,
Rocked by winds and waves of Suomi,
Carried by the rolling billows
To the sea-sides of Wainola.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Saw the fragments of the treasure
Floating on the billows landward,
Fragments of the lid in colors,
Much rejoicing, spake as follows:
“Thence will come the sprouting seed-grain,
The beginning of good fortune,
The unending of resources,
From the plowing and the sowing,
From the glimmer of the moonlight,
From the splendor of the sunshine,
On the fertile plains of Suomi,
On the meads of Kalevala.”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Thus addressed old Wainamoinen:
“Know I other mighty measures,
Know I means that are efficient,
And against thy golden moonlight,
And the splendor of thy sunshine,
And thy plowing, and thy reaping;
In the rocks I’ll sink the moonbeams,
Hide the sun within the mountain,
Let the frost destroy thy sowings,
Freeze the crops on all thy corn-fields;
Iron-hail I’ll send from heaven,
On the richness of thine acres,
On the barley of thy planting;
I will drive the bear from forests,
Send thee Otso from the thickets,
That he may destroy thy cattle,
May annihilate thy sheep-folds,
May destroy thy steeds at pasture.
I will send thee nine diseases,
Each more fatal than the other,
That will sicken all thy people,
Make thy children sink and perish,
Nevermore to visit Northland,
Never while the moonlight glimmers
On the plains of Kalevala!”
Thus the ancient bard made answer:
“Not a Laplander can banish
Wainamoinen and his people;
Never can a Turyalander
Drive my tribes from Kalevala;
God alone has power to banish,
God controls the fate of nations,
Never trusts the arms of evil,
Never gives His strength to others.
As I trust in my Creator,
Call upon benignant Ukko,
He will guard my crops from danger,
Drive the Frost-fiend from my corn-fields,
Drive great Otso to his caverns.

“Wicked Louhi of Pohyola,
Thou canst banish evil-doers,
In the rocks canst hide the wicked,
In thy mountains lock the guilty;
Thou canst never hide the moonlight,
Never hide the silver sunshine,
In the caverns of thy kingdom.
Freeze the crops of thine own planting,
Freeze the barley of thy sowing,
Send thine iron-hail from heaven
To destroy the Lapland corn-fields,
To annihilate thy people,
To destroy the hosts of Pohya;
Send great Otso from the heather,
Send the sharp-tooth from the forest,
To the fields of Sariola,
On the herds and flocks of Louhi!”

Thus the wicked hostess answered:
“All my power has departed,
All my strength has gone to others,
All my hope is in the deep-sea;
In the waters lies my Sampo!”

Then the hostess of Pohyola
Home departed, weeping, wailing,
To the land of cold and darkness;
Only took some worthless fragments
Of the Sampo to her people;
Carried she the lid to Pohya,
In the blue-sea left the handle;
Hence the poverty of Northland,
And the famines of Pohyola.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Hastened to the broad-sea’s margin,
Stepped upon the shore in joyance;
Found there fragments of the Sampo,
Fragments of the lid in colors,
On the borders of the waters,
On the curving sands and sea-sides;
Gathered well the Sampo-relics
From the waters near the fog-point,
On the island forest-covered.

Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:,
Spake these words in supplication:
“Grant, O Ukko, our Creator,
Grant to us, thy needful children,
Peace, and happiness, and plenty,
That our lives may be successful,
That our days may end in honor,
On the vales and hills of Suomi,
On the prairies of Wainola,
In the homes of Kalevala!

“Ukko, wise and good Creator,
Ukko, God of love and mercy,
Shelter and protect thy people
From the evil-minded heroes,
From the wiles of wicked women,
That our country’s plagues may leave us,
That thy faithful tribes may prosper.
Be our friend and strong protector,
Be the helper of thy children,
In the night a roof above them,
In the day a shield around them,
That the sunshine may not vanish,
That the moonlight may not lessen,
That the killing frosts may leave them,
And destructive hail pass over.
Build a metal wall around us,
From the valleys to the heavens;
Build of stone a mighty fortress
On the borders of Wainola,
Where thy people live and labor,
As their dwelling-place forever,
Sure protection to thy people,
Where the wicked may not enter,
Nor the thieves break through and pilfer,
Never while the moonlight glistens,
And the Sun brings golden blessings
To the plains of Kalevala.”




RUNE XLIV.
BIRTH OF THE SECOND HARP.


Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Long reflecting, sang these measures:
“It is now the time befitting
To awaken joy and gladness,
Time for me to touch the harp-strings,
Time to sing the songs primeval,
In these spacious halls and mansions,
In these homes of Kalevala;
But, alas! my harp lies hidden,
Sunk upon the deep-sea’s bottom,
To the salmon’s hiding-places,
To the dwellings of the whiting,
To the people of Wellamo,
Where the Northland-pike assemble.
Nevermore will I regain it,
Ahto never will return it,
Joy and music gone forever!

“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Forge for me a rake of iron,
Thickly set the teeth of copper,
Many fathoms long the handle;
Make a rake to search the waters,
Search the broad-sea to the bottom,
Rake the weeds and reeds together,
Rake them to the curving sea-shore,
That I may regain my treasure,
May regain my harp of fish-bone
From the whiting’s place of resting,
From the caverns of the salmon,
From the castles of Wellamo.”

Thereupon young Ilmarinen,
The eternal metal-worker,
Forges well a rake of iron,
Teeth in length a hundred fathoms,
And a thousand long the handle,
Thickly sets the teeth of copper.
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen
Takes the rake of magic metals,
Travels but a little distance,
To the cylinders of oak-wood,
To the copper-banded rollers,
Where he finds two ships awaiting,
One was new, the other ancient.

Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Thus addressed the new-made vessel:
“Go, thou boat of master-magic,
Hasten to the willing waters,
Speed away upon the blue-sea,
And without the hand to move thee;
Let my will impel thee seaward.”
Quick the boat rolled to the billows
On the cylinders of oak-wood,
Quick descended to the waters,
Willingly obeyed his master.

Wainamoinen, the magician,
Then began to rake the sea-beds,
Raked up all the water-flowers,
Bits of broken reeds and rushes,
Deep-sea shells and colored pebbles,
Did not find his harp of fish-bone,
Lost forever to Wainola!

Thereupon the ancient minstrel
Left the waters, homeward hastened,
Cap pulled down upon his forehead,
Sang this song with sorrow laden:
“Nevermore shall I awaken
With my harp-strings, joy and gladness!
Nevermore will Wainamoinen
Charm the people of the Northland
With the harp of his creation!
Nevermore my songs will echo
O’er the hills of Kalevala!”

Thereupon the ancient singer
Went lamenting through the forest,
Wandered through the sighing pine-woods,
Heard the wailing of a birch-tree,
Heard a juniper complaining;
Drawing nearer, waits and listens,
Thus the birch-tree he addresses:
“Wherefore, brother, art thou weeping,
Merry birch enrobed in silver,
Silver-leaved and silver-tasselled?
Art thou shedding tears of sorrow,
Since thou art not led to battle,
Not enforced to war with wizards?”
Wisely does the birch make answer:
“This the language of the many,
Others speak as thou, unjustly,
That I only live in pleasure,
That my silver leaves and tassels
Only whisper my rejoicings;
That I have no cares, no sorrows,
That I have no hours unhappy,
Knowing neither pain nor trouble.
I am weeping for my smallness,
Am lamenting for my weakness,
Have no sympathy, no pity,
Stand here motionless for ages,
Stand alone in fen and forest,
In these woodlands vast and joyless.
Others hope for coming summers,
For the beauties of the spring-time;
I, alas! a helpless birch-tree,
Dread the changing of the seasons,
I must give my bark to others,
Lose my leaves and silken tassels.
Often come the Suomi children,
Peel my bark and drink my life-blood:
Wicked shepherds in the summer,
Come and steal my belt of silver,
Of my bark make berry-baskets,
Dishes make, and cups for drinking.
Oftentimes the Northland maidens
Cut my tender limbs for birch-brooms,
Bind my twigs and silver tassels
Into brooms to sweep their cabins;
Often have the Northland heroes
Chopped me into chips for burning;
Three times in the summer season,
In the pleasant days of spring-time,
Foresters have ground their axes
On my silver trunk and branches,
Robbed me of my life for ages;
This my spring-time joy and pleasure,
This my happiness in summer,
And my winter days no better!
When I think of former troubles,
Sorrow settles on my visage,
And my face grows white with anguish;
Often do the winds of winter
And the hoar-frost bring me sadness,
Blast my tender leaves and tassels,
Bear my foliage to others,
Rob me of my silver raiment,
Leave me naked on the mountain,
Lone, and helpless, and disheartened!”
Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:
“Weep no longer, sacred birch-tree,
Mourn no more, my friend and brother,
Thou shalt have a better fortune;
I will turn thy grief to joyance,
Make thee laugh and sing with gladness.”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Made a harp from sacred birch-wood,
Fashioned in the days of summer,
Beautiful the harp of magic,
By the master’s hand created
On the fog-point in the Big-Sea,
On the island forest-covered,
Fashioned from the birch the archings,
And the frame-work from the aspen.
These the words of the magician:
“All the archings are completed,
And the frame is fitly finished;
Whence the hooks and pins for tuning,
That the harp may sing in concord?”

Near the way-side grew an oak-tree,
Skyward grew with equal branches,
On each twig an acorn growing,
Golden balls upon each acorn,
On each ball a singing cuckoo.
As each cuckoo’s call resounded,
Five the notes of song that issued
From the songster’s throat of joyance;
From each throat came liquid music,
Gold and silver for the master,
Flowing to the hills and hillocks,
To the silvery vales and mountains;
Thence he took the merry harp-pins,
That the harp might play in concord.
Spake again wise Wainamoinen:
“I the pins have well completed,
Still the harp is yet unfinished;
Now I need five strings for playing,
Where shall I procure the harp-strings?”
Then the ancient bard and minstrel
Journeyed through the fen and forest.
On a hillock sat a maiden,
Sat a virgin of the valley;
And the maiden was not weeping,
Joyful was the sylvan daughter,
Singing with the woodland songsters,
That the eventide might hasten,
In the hope that her beloved
Would the sooner sit beside her.

Wainamoinen, old and trusted,
Hastened, tripping to the virgin,
Asked her for her golden ringlets,
These the words of the magician:
“Give me, maiden, of thy tresses,
Give to me thy golden ringlets;
I will weave them into harp-strings,
To the joy of Wainamoinen,
To the pleasure of his people.”

Thereupon the forest-maiden
Gave the singer of her tresses,
Gave him of her golden ringlets,
And of these he made the harp-strings.
Sources of eternal pleasure
To the people of Wainola.

Thus the sacred harp is finished,
And the minstrel, Wainamoinen,
Sits upon the rock of joyance,
Takes the harp within his fingers,
Turns the arch up, looking skyward;
With his knee the arch supporting,
Sets the strings in tuneful order,
Runs his fingers o’er the harp-strings,
And the notes of pleasure follow.
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
Plays upon his harp of birch-wood.
Far away is heard the music,
Wide the harp of joy re-echoes;
Mountains dance and valleys listen,
Flinty rocks are torn asunder,
Stones are hurled upon the waters,
Pebbles swim upon the Big-Sea,
Pines and lindens laugh with pleasure,
Alders skip about the heather,
And the aspen sways in concord.

All the daughters of Wainola
Straightway leave their shining needles,
Hasten forward like the current,
Speed along like rapid rivers,
That they may enjoy and wonder.
Laugh the younger men and maidens,
Happy-hearted are the matrons
Flying swift to bear the playing,
To enjoy the common pleasure,
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen.
Aged men and bearded seniors,
Gray-haired mothers with their daughters
Stop in wonderment and listen.
Creeps the babe in full enjoyment
As he hears the magic singing,
Hears the harp of Wainamoinen.
All of Northland stops in wonder,
Speaks in unison these measures:
“Never have we heard such playing,
Never heard such strains of music,
Never since the earth was fashioned,
As the songs of this magician,
This sweet singer, Wainamoinen!”

Far and wide the sweet tones echo,
Ring throughout the seven hamlets,
O’er the seven islands echo;
Every creature of the Northland
Hastens forth to look and listen,
Listen to the songs of gladness,
To the harp of Wainamoinen.
All the beasts that haunt the woodlands
Fall upon their knees and wonder
At the playing of the minstrel,
At his miracles of concord.
All the songsters of the forests
Perch upon the trembling branches,
Singing to the wondrous playing
Of the harp of Wainamoinen.
All the dwellers of the waters
Leave their beds, and caves, and grottoes,
Swim against the shore and listen
To the playing of the minstrel,
To the harp of Wainamoinen.
All the little things in nature,
Rise from earth, and fall from ether,
Come and listen to the music,
To the notes of the enchanter,
To the songs of the magician,
To the harp of Wainamoinen.

Plays the singer of the Northland,
Plays in miracles of sweetness,
Plays one day, and then a second,
Plays the third from morn till even;
Plays within the halls and cabins,
In the dwellings of his people,
Till the floors and ceilings echo,
Till resound the roofs of pine-wood,
Till the windows speak and tremble,
Till the portals echo joyance,
And the hearth-stones sing in pleasure.
As he journeys through the forest,
As he wanders through the woodlands,
Pine and sorb-tree bid him welcome,
Birch and willow bend obeisance,
Beech and aspen bow submission;
And the linden waves her branches
To the measure of his playing,
To the notes of the magician.
As the minstrel plays and wanders,
Sings upon the mead and heather,
Glen and hill his songs re-echo,
Ferns and flowers laugh in pleasure,
And the shrubs attune their voices
To the music of the harp-strings,
To the songs of Wainamoinen.




RUNE XLV.
BIRTH OF THE NINE DISEASES.


Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Heard the word in Sariola,
Heard the news with ears of envy,
That Wainola lives and prospers,
That Osmoinen’s wealth increases,
Through the ruins of the Sampo,
Ruins of the lid in colors.
Thereupon her wrath she kindled,
Well considered, long reflected,
How she might prepare destruction
For the people of Wainola,
For the tribes of Kalevala.

With this prayer she turns to Ukko,
Thus entreats the god of thunder:
“Ukko, thou who art in heaven,
Help me slay Wainola’s people
With thine iron-hail of justice,
With thine arrows tipped with lightning,
Or from sickness let them perish,
Let them die the death deserving;
Let the men die in the forest,
And the women in the hurdles!”

The blind daughter of Tuoni,
Old and wicked witch, Lowyatar,
Worst of all the Death-land women,
Ugliest of Mana’s children,
Source of all the host of evils,
All the ills and plagues of Northland,
Black in heart, and soul, and visage,
Evil genius of Lappala,
Made her couch along the wayside,
On the fields of sin and sorrow;
Turned her back upon the East-wind,
To the source of stormy weather,
To the chilling winds of morning.

When the winds arose at evening,
Heavy-laden grew Lowyatar,
Through the east-wind’s impregnation,
On the sand-plains, vast and barren.
Long she bore her weight of trouble,
Many morns she suffered anguish,
Till at last she leaves the desert,
Makes her couch within the forest,
On a rock upon the mountain;
Labors long to leave her burden
By the mountain-springs and fountains,
By the crystal waters flowing,
By the sacred stream and whirlpool,
By the cataract and fire-stream;
But her burden does not lighten.
Blind Lowyatar, old and ugly,
Knew not where to look for succor,
How to lose her weight of sorrow,
Where to lay her evil children.

Spake the Highest from the heavens,
These the words of mighty Ukko:
“Is a triangle in Swamp-field,
Near the border of the ocean,
In the never-pleasant Northland,
In the dismal Sariola;
Thither go and lay thy burden,
In Pohyola leave thine offspring;
There the Laplanders await thee,
There will bid thy children welcome.”

Thereupon the blind Lowyatar,
Blackest daughter of Tuoni,
Mana’s old and ugly maiden,
Hastened on her journey northward,
To the chambers of Pohyola,
To the ancient halls of Louhi,
There to lay her heavy burdens,
There to leave her evil offspring.

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Old and toothless witch of Pohya,
Takes Lowyatar to her mansion;
Silently she leads the stranger
To the bath-rooms of her chamber,
Pours the foaming beer of barley,
Lubricates the bolts and hinges,
That their movements may be secret,
Speaks these measures to Lowyatar:
“Faithful daughter of Creation,
Thou most beautiful of women,
First and last of ancient mothers,
Hasten on thy feet to ocean,
To the ocean’s centre hasten,
Take the sea-foam from the waters,
Take the honey of the mermaids,
And anoint thy sacred members,
That thy labors may be lightened.

“Should all this be unavailing,
Ukko, thou who art in heaven,
Hasten hither, thou art needed,
Come thou to thy child in trouble,
Help the helpless and afflicted.
Take thy golden-colored sceptre,
Charm away opposing forces,
Strike the pillars of the stronghold,
Open all resisting portals,
That the great and small may wander
From their ancient hiding-places,
Through the courts and halls of freedom.”

Finally the blind Lowyatar,
Wicked witch of Tuonela,
Was delivered of her burden,
Laid her offspring in the cradle,
Underneath the golden covers.
Thus at last were born nine children,
In an evening of the summer,
From Lowyatar, blind and ancient,
Ugly daughter of Tuoni.
Faithfully the virgin-mother
Guards her children in affection,
As an artist loves and nurses
What his skillful hands have fashioned.

Thus Lowyatar named her offspring,
Colic, Pleurisy, and Fever,
Ulcer, Plague, and dread Consumption,
Gout, Sterility, and Cancer.
And the worst of these nine children
Blind Lowyatar quickly banished,
Drove away as an enchanter,
To bewitch the lowland people,
To engender strife and envy.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Banished all the other children
To the fog-point in the ocean,
To the island forest-covered;
Banished all the fatal creatures,
Gave these wicked sons of evil
To the people of Wainola,
To the youth of Kalevala,
For the Kalew-tribe’s destruction.
Quick Wainola’s maidens sicken,
Young and aged, men and heroes,
With the worst of all diseases,
With diseases new and nameless;
Sick and dying is Wainola.

Thereupon old Wainamoinen,
Wise and wonderful enchanter,
Hastens to his people’s rescue,
Hastens to a war with Mana,
To a conflict with Tuoni,
To destroy the evil children
Of the evil maid, Lowyatar.
Wainamoinen heats the bath-rooms,
Heats the blocks of healing-sandstone
With the magic wood of Northland,
Gathered by the sacred river;
Water brings in covered buckets
From the cataract and whirlpool;
Brooms he brings enwrapped with ermine,
Well the bath the healer cleanses,
Softens well the brooms of birch-wood;
Then a honey-heat he wakens,
Fills the rooms with healing vapors,
From the virtue of the pebbles
Glowing in the heat of magic,
Thus he speaks in supplication:
“Come, O Ukko, to my rescue,
God of mercy, lend thy presence,
Give these vapor-baths new virtues,
Grant to them the powers of healing,
And restore my dying people;
Drive away these fell diseases,
Banish them to the unworthy,
Let the holy sparks enkindle,
Keep this heat in healing limits,
That it may not harm thy children,
May not injure the afflicted.
When I pour the sacred waters
On the heated blocks of sandstone,
May the water turn to honey
Laden with the balm of healing.
Let the stream of magic virtues
Ceaseless flow to all my children,
From this bath enrolled in sea-moss,
That the guiltless may not suffer,
That my tribe-folk may not perish,
Till the Master gives permission,
Until Ukko sends his minions,
Sends diseases of his choosing,
To destroy my trusting people.
Let the hostess of Pohyola,
Wicked witch that sent these troubles,
Suffer from a gnawing conscience,
Suffer for her evil doings.
Should the Master of Wainola
Lose his magic skill and weaken,
Should he prove of little service
To deliver from misfortune,
To deliver from these evils,
Then may Ukko be our healer,
Be our strength and wise Physician.

“Omnipresent God of mercy,
Thou who livest in the heavens,
Hasten hither, thou art needed,
Hasten to thine ailing children,
To observe their cruel tortures,
To dispel these fell diseases,
Drive destruction from our borders.
Bring with thee thy mighty fire-sword,
Bring to me thy blade of lightning,
That I may subdue these evils,
That these monsters I may banish,
Send these pains, and ills, and tortures,
To the empire of Tuoni,
To the kingdom of the east-winds,
To the islands of the wicked,
To the caverns of the demons,
To the rocks within the mountains,
To the hidden beds of iron,
That the rocks may fall and sicken,
And the beds of iron perish.
Rocks and metals do not murmur
At the hands of the invader.

“Torture-daughter of Tuoni,
Sitting on the mount of anguish,
At the junction of three rivers,
Turning rocks of pain and torture,
Turn away these fell diseases
Through the virtues of the blue-stone;
Lead them to the water-channels,
Sink them in the deeps of ocean,
Where the winds can never find them,
Where the sunlight never enters.

“Should this prayer prove unavailing,
O, Health-virgin, maid of beauty
Come and heal my dying people,
Still their agonies and anguish,
Give them consciousness and comfort,
Give them healthful rest and slumber;
These diseases take and banish,
Take them in thy copper vessel,
To thy caves within the mountains,
To the summit of the Pain-rock,
Hurl them to thy boiling caldrons.
In the mountain is a touch-stone,
Lucky-stone of ancient story,
With a hole bored through the centre,
Through this pour these pains and tortures,
Wretched feelings, thoughts of evil,
Human ailments, days unlucky,
Tribulations, and misfortunes,
That they may not rise at evening,
May not see the light of morning.”

Ending thus, old Wainamoinen,
The eternal, wise enchanter,
Rubbed his sufferers with balsams,
Rubbed the tissues, red and painful,
With the balm of healing flowers,
Balsams made of herbs enchanted,
Sprinkled all with healing vapors,
Spake these words in supplication.
“Ukko, thou who art in heaven,
God of justice, and of mercy,
Send us from the east a rain-cloud,
Send a dark cloud from the north-west,
From the north let fall a third one,
Send us mingled rain and honey,
Balsam from the great Physician,
To remove this plague of Northland.
What I know of healing measures,
Only comes from my Creator;
Lend me, therefore, of thy wisdom,
That I may relieve my people,
Save them from the fell destroyer.
If my hands should fall in virtue.
Let the hands of Ukko follow,
God alone can save from trouble.
Come to us with thine enchantment,
Speak the magic words of healing,
That my people may not perish;
Give to all alleviation
From their sicknesses and sorrows;
In the morning, in the evening,
Let their wasting ailments vanish;
Drive the Death-child from Wainola,
Nevermore to visit Northland,
Never in the course of ages,
Never while the moonlight glimmers
O’er the lakes of Kalevala.”

Wainamoinen, the enchanter,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
Thus expelled the nine diseases,
Evil children of Lowyatar,
Healed the tribes of Kalevala,
Saved his people from destruction.




RUNE XLVI.
OTSO THE HONEY-EATER.


Came the tidings to Pohyola,
To the village of the Northland,
That Wainola had recovered
From her troubles and misfortunes,
From her sicknesses and sorrows.

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Toothless dame of Sariola,
Envy-laden, spake these measures:
“Know I other means of trouble,
I have many more resources;
I will drive the bear before me,
From the heather and the mountain,
Drive him from the fen and forest,
Drive great Otso from the glen-wood
On the cattle of Wainola,
On the flocks of Kalevala.”

Thereupon the Northland hostess
Drove the hungry bear of Pohya
From his cavern to the meadows,
To Wainola’s plains and pastures.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
To his brother spake as follows:
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Forge a spear from magic metals,
Forge a lancet triple-pointed,
Forge the handle out of copper,
That I may destroy great Otso,
Slay the mighty bear of Northland,
That he may not eat my horses,
Nor destroy my herds of cattle,
Nor the flocks upon my pastures.”

Thereupon the skillful blacksmith
Forged a spear from magic metals,
Forged a lancet triple-pointed,
Not the longest, nor the shortest,
Forged the spear in wondrous beauty.
On one side a bear was sitting,
Sat a wolf upon the other,
On the blade an elk lay sleeping,
On the shaft a colt was running,
Near the hilt a roebuck bounding.

Snows had fallen from the heavens,
Made the flocks as white as ermine
Or the hare, in days of winter,
And the minstrel sang these measures:
“My desire impels me onward
To the Metsola-dominions,
To the homes of forest-maidens,
To the courts of the white virgins;
I will hasten to the forest,
Labor with the woodland-forces.

“Ruler of the Tapio-forests,
Make of me a conquering hero,
Help me clear these boundless woodlands.
O Mielikki, forest-hostess,
Tapio’s wife, thou fair Tellervo,
Call thy dogs and well enchain them,
Set in readiness thy hunters,
Let them wait within their kennels.

“Otso, thou O Forest-apple,
Bear of honey-paws and fur-robes,
Learn that Wainamoinen follows,
That the singer comes to meet thee;
Hide thy claws within thy mittens,
Let thy teeth remain in darkness,
That they may not harm the minstrel,
May be powerless in battle.
Mighty Otso, much beloved,
Honey-eater of the mountains,
Settle on the rocks in slumber,
On the turf and in thy caverns;
Let the aspen wave above thee,
Let the merry birch-tree rustle
O’er thy head for thy protection.
Rest in peace, thou much-loved Otso,
Turn about within thy thickets,
Like the partridge at her brooding,
In the spring-time like the wild-goose.”

When the ancient Wainamoinen
Heard his dog bark in the forest,
Heard his hunter’s call and echo,
He addressed the words that follow:
“Thought it was the cuckoo calling,
Thought the pretty bird was singing;
It was not the sacred cuckoo,
Not the liquid notes of songsters,
’Twas my dog that called and murmured,
’Twas the echo of my hunter
At the cavern-doors of Otso,
On the border of the woodlands.”

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Finds the mighty bear in waiting,
Lifts in joy the golden covers,
Well inspects his shining fur-robes;
Lifts his honey-paws in wonder,
Then addresses his Creator:
“Be thou praised, O mighty Ukko,
As thou givest me great Otso,
Givest me the Forest-apple,
Thanks be paid to thee unending.”
To the bear he spake these measures:
“Otso, thou my well beloved,
Honey-eater of the woodlands,
Let not anger swell thy bosom;
I have not the force to slay thee,
Willingly thy life thou givest
As a sacrifice to Northland.
Thou hast from the tree descended,
Glided from the aspen branches,
Slippery the trunks in autumn,
In the fog-days, smooth the branches.
Golden friend of fen and forest,
In thy fur-robes rich and beauteous,
Pride of woodlands, famous Light-foot,
Leave thy cold and cheerless dwelling,
Leave thy home within the alders,
Leave thy couch among the willows,
Hasten in thy purple stockings,
Hasten from thy walks restricted,
Come among the haunts of heroes,
Join thy friends in Kalevala.
We shall never treat thee evil,
Thou shalt dwell in peace and plenty,
Thou shalt feed on milk and honey,
Honey is the food of strangers.
Haste away from this thy covert,
From the couch of the unworthy,
To a couch beneath the rafters
Of Wainola’s ancient dwellings.
Haste thee onward o’er the snow-plain,
As a leaflet in the autumn;
Skip beneath these birchen branches,
As a squirrel in the summer,
As a cuckoo in the spring-time.”

Wainamoinen, the magician,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
O’er the snow-fields hastened homeward,
Singing o’er the hills and mountains,
With his guest, the ancient Otso,
With his friend, the famous Light-foot,
With the Honey-paw of Northland.

Far away was heard the singing,
Heard the playing of the hunter,
Heard the songs of Wainamoinen;
All the people heard and wondered,
Men and maidens, young and aged,
From their cabins spake as follows:
“Hear the echoes from the woodlands,
Hear the bugle from the forest,
Hear the flute-notes of the songsters,
Hear the pipes of forest-maidens!”

Wainamoinen, old and trusty,
Soon appears within the court-yard.
Rush the people from their cabins,
And the heroes ask these questions:
“Has a mine of gold been opened,
Hast thou found a vein of silver,
Precious jewels in thy pathway?
Does the forest yield her treasures,
Give to thee the Honey-eater?
Does the hostess of the woodlands,
Give to thee the lynx and adder,
Since thou comest home rejoicing,
Playing, singing, on thy snow-shoes?”

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Gave this answer to his people:
“For his songs I caught the adder,
Caught the serpent for his wisdom;
Therefore do I come rejoicing,
Singing, playing, on my snow-shoes.
Not the mountain lynx, nor serpent,
Comes, however, to our dwellings;
The Illustrious is coming,
Pride and beauty of the forest,
’Tis the Master comes among us,
Covered with his friendly fur-robe.
Welcome, Otso, welcome, Light-foot,
Welcome, Loved-one from the glenwood!
If the mountain guest is welcome,
Open wide the gates of entry;
If the bear is thought unworthy,
Bar the doors against the stranger.”
This the answer of the tribe-folk:
“We salute thee, mighty Otso,
Honey-paw, we bid thee welcome,
Welcome to our courts and cabins,
Welcome, Light-foot, to our tables
Decorated for thy coming!
We have wished for thee for ages,
Waiting since the days of childhood,
For the notes of Tapio’s bugle,
For the singing of the wood-nymphs,
For the coming of dear Otso,
For the forest gold and silver,
Waiting for the year of plenty,
Longing for it as for summer,
As the shoe waits for the snow-fields,
As the sledge for beaten highways,
As the maiden for her suitor,
And the wife her husband’s coming;
Sat at evening by the windows,
At the gates have sat at morning,
Sat for ages at the portals,
Near the granaries in winter,
Till the snow-fields warmed and vanished,
Till the sails unfurled in joyance,
Till the earth grew green and blossomed,
Thinking all the while as follows:
‘Where is our beloved Otso,
Why delays our forest-treasure?
Has he gone to distant Ehstland,
To the upper glens of Suomi?’”
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Whither shall I lead the stranger,
Whither take the golden Light-foot?
Shall I lead him to the garner,
To the house of straw conduct him?”
This the answer of his tribe-folk:
“To the dining-hall lead Otso,
Greatest hero of the Northland.
Famous Light-foot, Forest-apple,
Pride and glory of the woodlands,
Have no fear before these maidens,
Fear not curly-headed virgins,
Clad in silver-tinselled raiment;
Maidens hasten to their chambers
When dear Otso joins their number,
When the hero comes among them.”
This the prayer of Wainamoinen:
“Grant, O Ukko, peace and plenty
Underneath these painted rafters,
In this ornamented dwelling;
Thanks be paid to gracious Ukko!”
Spake again the ancient minstrel:
“Whither shall we lead dear Otso,
Whither take the fur-clad stranger?”
This the answer of his people:
“Hither let the fur-robed Light-foot
Be saluted on his coming;
Let the Honey-paw be welcomed
To the hearth-stone of the penthouse,
Welcomed to the boiling caldrons,
That we may admire his fur-robe,
May behold his cloak with joyance.
Have no care, thou much-loved Otso,
Let not anger swell thy bosom
As thy coat we view with pleasure;
We thy fur shall never injure,
Shall not make it into garments
To protect unworthy people.”

Thereupon wise Wainamoinen
Pulled the sacred robe from Otso,
Spread it in the open court-yard,
Cut the members into fragments,
Laid them in the heating caldrons,
In the copper-bottomed vessels.
O’er the fire the crane was hanging,
On the crane were hooks of copper,
On the hooks the broiling vessels
Filled with bear-steak for the feasting,
Seasoned with the salt of Dwina,
From the Saxon-land imported,
From the distant Dwina-waters,
From the salt-sea brought in shallops.

Ready is the feast of Otso;
From the fire are swung the kettles
On the crane of polished iron;
In the centers of the tables
Is the bear displayed in dishes,
Golden dishes, decorated;
Of the fir-tree and the linden
Were the tables newly fashioned;
Drinking cups were forged from copper,
Knives of gold and spoons of silver;
Filled the vessels to their borders
With the choicest bits of Light-foot,
Fragments of the Forest-apple.
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Ancient one with bosom golden,
Potent voice in Tapio’s council,
Metsola’s most lovely hostess,
Hostess of the glen and forest,
Hero-son of Tapiola,
Stalwart youth in cap of scarlet,
Tapio’s most beauteous virgin,
Fair Tellervo of the woodlands,
Metsola with all her people,
Come, and welcome, to the feasting,
To the marriage-feast of Otso!
All sufficient, the provisions,
Food to eat and drink abundant,
Plenty for the hosts assembled,
Plenty more to give the village.”
This the question of the people:
“Tell us of the birth of Otso!
Was he born within a manger,
Was he nurtured in the bath-room
Was his origin ignoble?”
This is Wainamoinen’s answer:
“Otso was not born a beggar,
Was not born among the rushes,
Was not cradled in a manger;
Honey-paw was born in ether,
In the regions of the Moon-land,
On the shoulders of Otava,
With the daughters of creation.

“Through the ether walked a maiden,
On the red rims of the cloudlets,
On the border of the heavens,
In her stockings purple-tinted,
In her golden-colored sandals.
In her hand she held a wool-box,
With a hair-box on her shoulder;
Threw the wool upon the ocean,
And the hair upon the rivers;
These are rocked by winds and waters,
Water-currents bear them onward,
Bear them to the sandy sea-shore,
Land them near the woods of honey,
On an island forest-covered.

“Fair Mielikki, woodland hostess,
Tapio’s most cunning daughter,
Took the fragments from the sea-side,
Took the white wool from the waters,
Sewed the hair and wool together,
Laid the bundle in her basket,
Basket made from bark of birch-wood,
Bound with cords the magic bundle;
With the chains of gold she bound it
To the pine-tree’s topmost branches.
There she rocked the thing of magic,
Rocked to life the tender baby,
Mid the blossoms of the pine-tree,
On the fir-top set with needles;
Thus the young bear well was nurtured,
Thus was sacred Otso cradled
On the honey-tree of Northland,
In the middle of the forest.

“Sacred Otso grew and flourished,
Quickly grew with graceful movements,
Short of feet, with crooked ankles,
Wide of mouth and broad of forehead,
Short his nose, his fur-robe velvet;
But his claws were not well fashioned,
Neither were his teeth implanted.
Fair Mielikki, forest hostess,
Spake these words in meditation:
‘Claws I should be pleased to give him,
And with teeth endow the wonder,
Would he not abuse the favor.’

“Swore the bear a promise sacred,
On his knees before Mielikki,
Hostess of the glen and forest,
And before omniscient Ukko,
First and last of all creators,
That he would not harm the worthy,
Never do a deed of evil.
Then Mielikki, woodland hostess,
Wisest maid of Tapiola,
Sought for teeth and claws to give him,
From the stoutest mountain-ashes,
From the juniper and oak tree,
From the dry knots of the alder.
Teeth and claws of these were worthless,
Would not render goodly service.

“Grew a fir-tree on the mountain,
Grew a stately pine in Northland,
And the fir had silver branches,
Bearing golden cones abundant;
These the sylvan maiden gathered,
Teeth and claws of these she fashioned
In the jaws and feet of Otso,
Set them for the best of uses.
Then she freed her new-made creature,
Let the Light-foot walk and wander,
Let him lumber through the marshes,
Let him amble through the forest,
Roll upon the plains and pastures;
Taught him how to walk a hero,
How to move with graceful motion,
How to live in ease and pleasure,
How to rest in full contentment,
In the moors and in the marshes,
On the borders of the woodlands;
How unshod to walk in summer,
Stockingless to run in autumn;
How to rest and sleep in winter
In the clumps of alder-bushes
Underneath the sheltering fir-tree,
Underneath the pine’s protection,
Wrapped securely in his fur-robes,
With the juniper and willow.
This the origin of Otso,
Honey-eater of the Northlands,
Whence the sacred booty cometh.”
Thus again the people questioned:
“Why became the woods so gracious,
Why so generous and friendly?
Why is Tapio so humored,
That he gave his dearest treasure,
Gave to thee his Forest-apple,
Honey-eater of his kingdom?
Was he startled with thine arrows,
Frightened with the spear and broadsword?”

Wainamoinen, the magician,
Gave this answer to the question:
“Filled with kindness was the forest,
Glen and woodland full of greetings,
Tapio showing greatest favor.
Fair Mielikki, forest hostess,
Metsola’s bewitching daughter,
Beauteous woodland maid, Tellervo,
Gladly led me on my journey,
Smoothed my pathway through the glen-wood.
Marked the trees upon the mountains,
Pointing me to Otso’s caverns,
To the Great Bear’s golden island.

“When my journeyings had ended,
When the bear had been discovered,
Had no need to launch my javelins,
Did not need to aim the arrow;
Otso tumbled in his vaulting,
Lost his balance in his cradle,
In the fir-tree where he slumbered;
Tore his breast upon the branches,
Freely gave his life to others.

“Mighty Otso, my beloved,
Thou my golden friend and hero,
Take thy fur-cap from thy forehead,
Lay aside thy teeth forever,
Hide thy fingers in the darkness,
Close thy mouth and still thine anger,
While thy sacred skull is breaking.

“Now I take the eyes of Otso,
Lest he lose the sense of seeing,
Lest their former powers shall weaken;
Though I take not all his members,
Not alone must these be taken.

“Now I take the ears of Otso,
Lest he lose the sense of hearing,
Lest their former powers shall weaken;
Though I take not all his members,
Not alone must these be taken.

“Now I take the nose of Otso,
Lest he lose the sense of smelling,
Lest its former powers shall weaken;
Though I take not all his members,
Not alone must this be taken.

“Now I take the tongue of Otso,
Lest he lose the sense of tasting,
Lest its former powers shall weaken;
Though I take not all his members,
Not alone must this be taken.

“Now I take the brain of Otso,
Lest he lose the means of thinking,
Lest his consciousness should fail him,
Lest his former instincts weaken;
Though I take not all his members,
Not alone must this be taken.

“I will reckon him a hero,
That will count the teeth of Light-foot,
That will loosen Otso’s fingers
From their settings firmly fastened.”

None he finds with strength sufficient
To perform the task demanded.
Therefore ancient Wainamoinen
Counts the teeth of sacred Otso;
Loosens all the claws of Light-foot,
With his fingers strong as copper,
Slips them from their firm foundations,
Speaking to the bear these measures:
“Otso, thou my Honey-eater,
Thou my Fur-ball of the woodlands,
Onward, onward, must thou journey
From thy low and lonely dwelling,
To the court-rooms of the village.
Go, my treasure, through the pathway
Near the herds of swine and cattle,
To the hill-tops forest covered,
To the high and rising mountains,
To the spruce-trees filled with needles,
To the branches of the pine-tree;
There remain, my Forest-apple,
Linger there in lasting slumber,
Where the silver bells are ringing,
To the pleasure of the shepherd.”

Thus beginning, and thus ending,
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Hastened from his emptied tables,
And the children thus addressed him:
“Whither hast thou led thy booty,
Where hast left thy Forest-apple,
Sacred Otso of the woodlands?
Hast thou left him on the iceberg,
Buried him upon the snow-field?
Hast thou sunk him in the quicksand,
Laid him low beneath the heather?”
Wainamoinen spake in answer:
“Have not left him on the iceberg,
Have not buried him in snow-fields;
There the dogs would soon devour him,
Birds of prey would feast upon him;
Have not hidden him in Swamp-land,
Have not buried him in heather;
There the worms would live upon him,
Insects feed upon his body.
Thither I have taken Otso,
To the summit of the Gold-hill,
To the copper-bearing mountain,
Laid him in his silken cradle
In the summit of a pine-tree,
Where the winds and sacred branches
Rock him to his lasting slumber,
To the pleasure of the hunter,
To the joy of man and hero.
To the east his lips are pointing,
While his eyes are northward looking;
But dear Otso looks not upward,
For the fierceness of the storm-winds
Would destroy his sense of vision.”

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Touched again his harp of joyance,
Sang again his songs enchanting,
To the pleasure of the evening,
To the joy of morn arising.
Spake the singer of Wainola:
“Light for me a torch of pine-wood,
For the darkness is appearing,
That my playing may be joyous
And my wisdom-songs find welcome.”

Then the ancient sage and singer,
Wise and worthy Wainamoinen,
Sweetly sang, and played, and chanted,
Through the long and dreary evening,
Ending thus his incantation:
“Grant, O Ukko, my Creator,
That the people of Wainola
May enjoy another banquet
In the company of Light-foot;
Grant that we may long remember
Kalevala’s feast with Otso!

“Grant, O Ukko, my Creator,
That the signs may guide our footsteps,
That the notches in the pine-tree
May direct my faithful people
To the bear-dens of the woodlands;
That great Tapio’s sacred bugle
May resound through glen and forest;
That the wood-nymph’s call may echo,
May be heard in field and hamlet,
To the joy of all that listen!
Let great Tapio’s horn for ages
Ring throughout the fen and forest,
Through the hills and dales of Northland
O’er the meadows and the mountains,
To awaken song and gladness
In the forests of Wainola,
On the snowy plains of Suomi,
On the meads of Kalevala,
For the coming generations.”




RUNE XLVII.
LOUHI STEALS SUN, MOON, AND FIRE.


Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Touched again his magic harp-strings,
Sang in miracles of concord,
Filled the north with joy and gladness.
Melodies arose to heaven,
Songs arose to Luna’s chambers,
Echoed through the Sun’s bright windows
And the Moon has left her station,
Drops and settles in the birch-tree;
And the Sun comes from his castle,
Settles in the fir-tree branches,
Comes to share the common pleasure,
Comes to listen to the singing,
To the harp of Wainamoinen.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Northland’s old and toothless wizard,
Makes the Sun and Moon her captives;
In her arms she takes fair Luna
From her cradle in the birch-tree,
Calls the Sun down from his station,
From the fir-tree’s bending branches,
Carries them to upper Northland,
To the darksome Sariola;
Hides the Moon, no more to glimmer,
In a rock of many colors;
Hides the Sun, to shine no longer,
In the iron-banded mountain;
Thereupon these words she utters:
“Moon of gold and Sun of silver,
Hide your faces in the caverns
Of Pohyola’s dismal mountain;
Shine no more to gladden Northland,
Till I come to give ye freedom,
Drawn by coursers nine in number,
Sable coursers of one mother!”

When the golden Moon had vanished,
And the silver Sun had hidden
In the iron-banded caverns,
Louhi stole the fire from Northland,
From the regions of Wainola,
Left the mansions cold and cheerless,
And the cabins full of darkness.
Night was king and reigned unbroken,
Darkness ruled in Kalevala,
Darkness in the home of Ukko.
Hard to live without the moonlight,
Harder still without the sunshine;
Ukko’s life is dark and dismal,
When the Sun and Moon desert him.

Ukko, first of all creators,
Lived in wonder at the darkness;
Long reflected, well considered,
Why this miracle in heaven,
What this accident in nature
To the Moon upon her journey;
Why the Sun no more is shining,
Why has disappeared the moonlight.
Then great Ukko walked the heavens,
To the border of the cloudlets,
In his purple-colored vestments,
In his silver-tinselled sandals,
Seeking for the golden moonlight,
Looking for the silver sunshine.
Lightning Ukko struck in darkness
From the edges of his fire-sword;
Shot the flames in all directions,
From his blade of golden color,
Into heaven’s upper spaces,
Into Ether’s starry pastures.

When a little fire had kindled,
Ukko hid it in the cloud-space,
In a box of gold and silver,
In a case adorned with silver,
Gave it to the ether-maidens,
Called a virgin then to rock it,
That it might become a new-moon,
That a second sun might follow.
On the long-cloud rocked the virgin,
On the blue-edge of the ether,
Rocked the fire of the Creator,
In her copper-colored cradle,
With her ribbons silver-studded.
Lowly bend the bands of silver,
Loud the golden cradle echoes,
And the clouds of Northland thunder,
Low descends the dome of heaven,
At the rocking of the lightning,
Rocking of the fire of Ukko.
Thus the flame was gently cradled
By the virgin of the ether.
Long the fair and faithful maiden
Stroked the Fire-child with her fingers,
Tended it with care and pleasure,
Till in an unguarded moment
It escaped the Ether-virgin,
Slipped the hands of her that nursed it.
Quick the heavens are burst asunder,
Quick the vault of Ukko opens,
Downward drops the wayward Fire-child,
Downward quick the red-ball rushes,
Shoots across the arch of heaven,
Hisses through the startled cloudlets,
Flashes through the troubled welkin,
Through nine starry vaults of ether.

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Spake and these the words he uttered:
“Blacksmith brother, Ilmarinen,
Let us haste and look together,
What the kind of fire that falleth,
What the form of light that shineth
From the upper vault of heaven,
From the lower earth and ocean.
Has a second moon arisen,
Can it be a ball of sunlight?”

Thereupon the heroes wandered,
Onward journeyed and reflected,
How to gain the spot illumined,
How to find the sacred Fire-child.
Came a river rushing by them,
Broad and stately as an ocean.
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen
There began to build a vessel,
Build a boat to cross the river.
With the aid of Ilmarinen,
From the oak he cut the row-locks,
From the pine the oars he fashioned,
From the aspen shapes the rudder.
When the vessel they had finished,
Quick they rolled it to the current,
Hard they rowed and ever forward,
On the Nawa-stream and waters,
At the head of Nawa-river.

Ilmatar, the ether-daughter,
Foremost daughter of creation,
Came to meet them on their journey,
Thus addressed the coming strangers:
“Who are ye of Northland heroes,
Rowing on the Nawa-waters?”
Wainamoinen gave this answer:
“This the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
I the ancient Wainamoinen.
Tell us now thy name and station,
Whither going, whence thou comest,
Where thy tribe-folk live and linger?”
Spake the daughter of the Ether:
“I the oldest of the women,
Am the first of Ether’s daughters,
Am the first of ancient mothers;
Seven times have I been wedded
To the heroes of creation.
Whither do ye strangers journey?”
Answered thus old Wainamoinen:
“Fire has left Wainola’s hearth-stones,
Light has disappeared from Northland;
Have been sitting long in darkness,
Cold and darkness our companions;
Now we journey to discover
What the fire that fell from heaven,
Falling from the cloud’s red lining,
To the deeps of earth and ocean.”
Ilmatar returned this answer:
“Hard the flame is to discover,
Hard indeed to find the Fire-child;
Has committed many mischiefs,
Nothing good has he accomplished;
Quick the fire-ball fell from ether,
From the red rims of the cloudlets,
From the plains of the Creator,
Through the ever-moving heavens,
Through the purple ether-spaces,
Through the blackened flues of Turi,
To Palwoinen’s rooms uncovered.
When the fire had reached the chambers
Of Palwoinen, son of evil,
He began his wicked workings,
He engaged in lawless actions,
Raged against the blushing maidens,
Fired the youth to evil conduct,
Singed the beards of men and heroes.

“Where the mother nursed her baby,
In the cold and cheerless cradle,
Thither flew the wicked Fire-child,
There to perpetrate some mischief;
In the cradle burned the infant,
By the infant burned the mother,
That the babe might visit Mana,
In the kingdom of Tuoni;
Said the child was born for dying,
Only destined for destruction,
Through the tortures of the Fire-child.
Greater knowledge had the mother,
Did not journey to Manala,
Knew the word to check the red-flame,
How to banish the intruder
Through the eyelet of a needle,
Through the death-hole of the hatchet.”

Then the ancient Wainamoinen
Questioned Ilmatar as follows:
“Whither did the Fire-child wander,
Whither did the red-flame hasten,
From the border-fields of Turi,
To the woods, or to the waters?”
Straightway Ilmatar thus answers:
“When the fire had fled from Turi,
From the castles of Palwoinen,
Through the eyelet of the needle,
Through the death-hole of the hatchet,
First it burned the fields, and forests,
Burned the lowlands, and the heather;
Then it sought the mighty waters,
Sought the Alue-sea and river,
And the waters hissed and sputtered
In their anger at the Fire-child,
Fiery red the boiling Alue!

“Three times in the nights of summer,
Nine times in the nights of autumn,
Boil the waters to the tree-tops,
Roll and tumble to the mountain,
Through the red-ball’s force and fury;
Hurls the pike upon the pastures,
To the mountain-cliffs, the salmon,
Where the ocean-dwellers wonder,
Long reflect and well consider
How to still the angry waters.
Wept the salmon for his grotto,
Mourned the whiting for his cavern,
And the lake-trout for his dwelling.
Quick the crook-necked salmon darted,
Tried to catch the fire-intruder,
But the red-ball quick escaped him;
Darted then the daring whiting,
Swallowed quick the wicked Fire-child,
Swallowed quick the flame of evil.
Quiet grow the Alue-waters,
Slowly settle to their shore-lines,
To their long-accustomed places,
In the long and dismal evening.

“Time had gone but little distance,
When the whiting grow affrighted,
Fear befel the fire-devourer;
Burning pain and writhing tortures
Seized the eater of the Fire-child;
Swam the fish in all directions,
Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,
Swam one day, and then a second,
Swam the third from morn till even;
Swam she to the whiting-island,
To the caverns of the salmon,
Where a hundred islands cluster;
And the islands there assembled
Thus addressed the fire-devourer:
‘There is none within these waters,
In this narrow Alue-lakelet,
That will eat the fated Fire-fish,
That will swallow thee in trouble,
In thine agonies and torture
From the Fire-child thou hast eaten.’

“Hearing this a trout forth darting,
Swallowed quick as light the whiting,
Quickly ate the fire-devourer.
Time had gone but little distance,
When the trout became affrighted,
Fear befel the whiting-eater;
Burning pain and writhing torment
Seized the eater of the Fire-fish.
Swam the trout in all directions,
Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,
Swam one day, and then a second,
Swam the third from morn till even;
Swam she to the salmon-island,
Swam she to the whiting-grottoes,
Where a thousand islands cluster,
And the islands there assembled
Thus addressed the tortured lake-trout:
‘There is none within this river,
In these narrow Alue-waters,
That will eat the wicked Fire-fish,
That will swallow thee in trouble,
In thine agonies and tortures,
From the Fire-fish thou hast eaten.’

Hearing this the gray-pike darted,
Swallowed quick as light the lake-trout,
Quickly ate the tortured Fire-fish.

“Time had gone but little distance,
When the gray-pike grew affrighted,
Fear befel the lake-trout-eater;
Burning pain and writhing torment
Seized the reckless trout-devourer;
Swam the pike in all directions,
Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,
Swam one day, and then a second,
Swam the third from morn till even,
To the cave of ocean-swallows,
To the sand-hills of the sea-gull,
Where a hundred islands cluster;
And the islands there assembled
Thus addressed the fire-devourer:
‘There is none within this lakelet,
In these narrow Alue-waters,
That will eat the fated Fire-fish,
That will swallow thee in trouble,
In thine agonies and tortures,
From the Fire-fish thou hast eaten.’”

Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,
With the aid of Ilmarinen,
Weaves with skill a mighty fish-net
From the juniper and sea-grass;
Dyes the net with alder-water,
Ties it well with thongs of willow.
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen
Called the maidens to the fish-net,
And the sisters came as bidden.
With the netting rowed they onward,
Rowed they to the hundred islands,
To the grottoes of the salmon,
To the caverns of the whiting,
To the reeds of sable color,
Where the gray-pike rests and watches.
On they hasten to the fishing,
Drag the net in all directions,
Drag it lengthwise, sidewise, crosswise,
And diagonally zigzag;
But they did not catch the Fire-fish.

Then the brothers went a-fishing,
Dragged the net in all directions,
Backwards, forwards, lengthwise, sidewise,
Through the homes of ocean-dwellers,
Through the grottoes of the salmon,
Through the dwellings of the whiting,
Through the reed-beds of the lake-trout,
Where the gray-pike lies in ambush;
But the fated Fire-fish came not,
Came not from the lake’s abysses,
Came not from the Alue-waters.

Little fish could not be captured
In the large nets of the masters;
Murmured then the deep-sea-dwellers,
Spake the salmon to the lake-trout,
And the lake-trout to the whiting,
And the whiting to the gray-pike:
“Have the heroes of Wainola
Died, or have they all departed
From these fertile shores and waters?
Where then are the ancient weavers,
Weavers of the nets of flax-thread,
Those that frighten us with fish-poles,
Drag us from our homes unwilling?”

Hearing this wise Wainamoinen
Answered thus the deep-sea-dwellers:
“Neither have Wainola’s heroes
Died, nor have they all departed
From these fertile shores and waters,
Two are born where one has perished;
Longer poles and finer fish-nets
Have the sons of Kalevala!”




RUNE XLVIII.
CAPTURE OF THE FIRE-FISH.


Wainamoinen, the enchanter,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
Long reflected, well considered,
How to weave the net of flax-yarn,
Weave the fish-net of the fathers.
Spake the minstrel of Wainola:
“Who will plow the field and fallow,
Sow the flax, and spin the flax-threads,
That I may prepare the fish-net,
Wherewith I may catch the Fire-pike,
May secure the thing of evil?”

Soon they found a fertile island,
Found the fallow soil befitting,
On the border of the heather,
And between two stately oak-trees,
They prepared the soil for sowing.
Searching everywhere for flax-seed,
Found it in Tuoni’s kingdom,
In the keeping of an insect.
Then they found a pile of ashes,
Where the fire had burned a vessel;
In the ashes sowed the seedlings
Near the Alue-lake and border,
In the rich and loamy fallow.
There the seed took root and flourished,
Quickly grew to great proportions,
In a single night in summer.
Thus the flax was sowed at evening,
Placed within the earth by moonlight;
Quick it grew, and quickly ripened,
Quick Wainola’s heroes pulled it,
Quick they broke it on the hackles,
Hastened with it to the waters,
Dipped it in the lake and washed it;
Quickly brought it home and dried it,
Quickly broke, and combed, and smoothed it,
Brushed it well at early morning,
Laid it into laps for spinning.
Quick the maidens twirl the spindles,
Spin the flaxen threads for weaving,
In a single night in summer.
Quick the sisters wind and reel it,
Make it ready for the needle.
Brothers weave it into fish-nets,
And the fathers twist the cordage,
While the mothers knit the meshes,
Rapidly the mesh-stick circles;
Soon the fish-net is completed,
In a single night in summer.
As the magic net is finished,
And in length a hundred fathoms,
On the rim three hundred fathoms,
Rounded stones are fastened to it,
Joined thereto are seven float-boards.

Now the young men take the fish-net,
And the old men cheer them onward,
Wish them good-luck at their fishing.
Long they row and drag the flax-seine,
Here and there the net is lowered;
Now they drag it lengthwise, sidewise,
Drag it through the slimy reed-beds;
But they do not catch the Fire-pike,
Only smelts, and luckless red-fish,
Little fish of little value.
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Let us go ourselves a-fishing,
Let us catch the fish of evil!”

To the fishing went the brothers,
Magic heroes of the Northland,
Pulled the fish-net through the waters,
Toward an island in the deep-sea;
Then they turn and drag the fish-net
Toward a meadow jutting seaward;
Now they drag it toward Wainola,
Draw it lengthwise, sidewise, crosswise,
Catching fish of every species,
Salmon, trout, and pike, and whiting,
Do not catch the evil Fire-fish.

Then the master, Wainamoinen,
Made additions to its borders,
Made it many fathoms wider,
And a hundred fathoms longer,
Then these words the hero uttered:
“Famous blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Let us go again a-fishing,
Row again the magic fish-net,
Drag it well through all the waters,
That we may obtain the Fire-pike!”

Thereupon the Northland heroes
Go a second time a-fishing,
Drag their nets across the rivers,
Lakelets, seas, and bays, and inlets,
Catching fish of many species,
But the Fire-fish is not taken.

Wainamoinen, ancient singer,
Long reflecting, spake these measures:
“Dear Wellamo, water-hostess,
Ancient mother with the reed-breast,
Come, exchange thy water-raiment,
Change thy coat of reeds and rushes
For the garments I shall give thee,
Light sea-foam, thine inner vesture,
And thine outer, moss and sea-grass,
Fashioned by the wind’s fair daughters,
Woven by the flood’s sweet maidens;
I will give thee linen vestments
Spun from flax of softest fiber,
Woven by the Moon’s white virgins,
Fashioned by the Sun’s bright daughters,
Fitting raiment for Wellamo!

“Ahto, king of all the waters,
Ruler of a thousand grottoes,
Take a pole of seven fathoms,
Search with this the deepest waters,
Rummage well the lowest bottoms;
Stir up all the reeds and sea-weeds,
Hither drive a school of gray-pike,
Drive them to our magic fish-net,
From the haunts in pike abounding,
From the caverns, and the trout-holes,
From the whirlpools of the deep-sea,
From the bottomless abysses,
Where the sunshine never enters,
Where the moonlight never visits,
And the sands are never troubled.”

Rose a pigmy from the waters,
From the floods a little hero,
Riding on a rolling billow,
And the pigmy spake these measures:
“Dost thou wish a worthy helper,
One to use the pole and frighten
Pike and salmon to thy fish-nets?”

Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Answered thus the lake-born hero:
“Yea, we need a worthy helper,
One to hold the pole, and frighten
Pike and salmon to our fish-nets.”

Thereupon the water-pigmy
Cut a linden from the border,
Spake these words to Wainamoinen:
“Shall I scare with all my powers,
With the forces of my being,
As thou needest shall I scare them?”
Spake the minstrel, Wainamoinen:
“If thou scarest as is needed,
Thou wilt scare with all thy forces,
With the strength of thy dominions.”

Then began the pigmy-hero,
To affright the deep-sea-dwellers;
Drove the fish in countless numbers
To the net of the magicians.

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Drew his net along the waters,
Drew it with his ropes of flax-thread,
Spake these words of magic import:
“Come ye fish of Northland waters
To the regions of my fish-net,
As my hundred meshes lower.”

Then the net was drawn and fastened,
Many were the gray-pike taken
By the master and magician.
Wainamoinen, happy-hearted,
Hastened to a neighboring island,
To a blue-point in the waters,
Near a red-bridge on the headland;
Landed there his draught of fishes,
Cast the pike upon the sea-shore,
And the Fire-pike was among them,
Cast the others to the waters.
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“May I touch thee with my fingers,
Using not my gloves of iron,
Using not my blue-stone mittens?”
This the Sun-child hears and answers:
“I should like to carve the Fire-fish,
I should like this pike to handle,
If I had the knife of good-luck.”

Quick a knife falls from the heavens,
From the clouds a magic fish-knife,
Silver-edged and golden-headed,
To the girdle of the Sun-child;
Quick he grasps the copper handle,
Quick the hero carves the Fire-pike,
Finds therein the tortured lake-trout;
Carves the lake-trout thus discovered,
Finds therein the fated whiting;
Carves the whiting, finds a blue-ball
In the third cave of his body.
He, the blue-ball quick unwinding,
Finds within a ball of scarlet;
Carefully removes the cover,
Finds the ball of fire within it,
Finds the flame from heaven fallen,
From the heights of the seventh heaven,
Through nine regions of the ether.

Wainamoinen long reflected
How to get the magic fire-ball
To Wainola’s fireless hearth-stones,
To his cold and cheerless dwellings.
Quick he snatched the fire of heaven
From the fingers of the Sun-child.
Wainamoinen’s beard it singes,
Burns the brow of Ilmarinen,
Burns the fingers of the blacksmith.
Rolling forth it hastens westward,
Hastens to the Alue shore-lines,
Burns the juniper and alder,
Burns the arid heath and meadow,
Rises to the lofty linden,
Burns the firs upon the mountains;
Hastens onward, onward, onward,
Burns the islands of the Northland,
Burns the Sawa fields and forests,
Burns the dry lands of Karyala.

Straightway ancient Wainamoinen
Hastens through the fields and fenlands,
Tracks the ranger to the glen-wood,
Finds the Fire-child in an elm-tree,
Sleeping in a bed of fungus.

Thereupon wise Wainamoinen
Wakes the child and speaks these measures:
“Wicked fire that God created,
Flame of Ukko from the heavens,
Thou hast gone in vain to sea-caves,
To the lakes without a reason;
Better go thou to my village,
To the hearth-stones of my people;
Hide thyself within my chimneys,
In mine ashes sleep and linger.
In the day-time I will use thee
To devour the blocks of birch-wood;
In the evening I will hide thee
Underneath the golden circle.”

Then he took the willing Panu,
Took the willing fire of Ukko,
Laid it in a box of tinder,
In the punk-wood of a birch-tree,
In a vessel forged from copper;
Carried it with care and pleasure
To the fog-point in the waters,
To the island forest covered.
Thus returned the fire to Northland,
To the chambers of Wainola,
To the hearths of Kalevala.

Ilmarinen, famous blacksmith,
Hastened to the deep-sea’s margin,
Sat upon the rock of torture,
Feeling pain the flame had given,
Laved his wounds with briny water,
Thus to still the Fire-child’s fury,
Thus to end his persecutions.

Long reflecting, Ilmarinen
Thus addressed the flame of Ukko:
“Evil Panu from the heavens,
Wicked son of God from ether,
Tell me what has made thee angry,
Made thee burn my weary members,
Burn my beard, and face, and fingers,
Made me suffer death-land tortures?”
Spake again young Ilmarinen:
“How can I wild Panu conquer,
How shall I control his conduct,
Make him end his evil doings?
Come, thou daughter from Pohyola,
Come, white virgin of the hoar-frost,
Come on shoes of ice from Lapland,
Icicles upon thy garments,
In one hand a cup of white-frost,
In the other hand an ice-spoon;
Sprinkle snow upon my members,
Where the Fire-child has been resting,
Let the hoar-frost fall and settle.

“Should this prayer be unavailing,
Come, thou son of Sariola,
Come, thou child of Frost from Pohya,
Come, thou Long-man from the ice-plains,
Of the height of stately pine-trees,
Slender as the trunks of lindens,
On thy hands the gloves of Hoar-frost,
Cap of ice upon thy forehead,
On thy waist a white-frost girdle;
Bring the ice-dust from Pohyola,
From the cold and sunless village.
Rain is crystallized in Northland,
Ice in Pohya is abundant,
Lakes of ice and ice-bound rivers,
Frozen smooth, the sea of ether.
Bounds the hare in frosted fur-robe,
Climbs the bear in icy raiment,
Ambles o’er the snowy mountains.
Swans of frost descend the rivers,
Ducks of ice in countless numbers
Swim upon thy freezing waters,
Near the cataract and whirlpool.
Bring me frost upon thy snow-sledge,
Snow and ice in great abundance,
From the summit of the wild-top,
From the borders of the mountains.
With thine ice, and snow, and hoar-frost
Cover well mine injured members
Where wild Panu has been resting,
Where the child of Fire has lingered.

“Should this call be ineffective,
Ukko, God of love and mercy,
First and last of the creators,
From the east send forth a snow-cloud,
From the west despatch a second,
Join their edges well together,
Let there be no vacant places,
Let these clouds bring snow and hoar-frost,
Lay the healing balm of Ukko
On my burning, tortured tissues,
Where wild Panu has been resting.”

Thus the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
Stills the pains by fire engendered,
Stills the agonies and tortures
Brought him by the child of evil,
Brought him by the wicked Panu.




RUNE XLIX.
RESTORATION OF THE SUN AND MOON.


Thus has Fire returned to Northland;
But the gold Moon is not shining,
Neither gleams the silver sunlight
In the chambers of Wainola,
On the plains of Kalevala.
On the crops the white-frost settled,
And the cattle died of hunger,
Even birds grew sick and perished.
Men and maidens, faint and famished,
Perished in the cold and darkness,
From the absence of the sunshine,
From the absence of the moonlight.
Knew the pike his holes and hollows,
And the eagle knew his highway,
Knew the winds the times for sailing;
But the wise men of the Northland
Could not know the dawn of morning,
On the fog-point in the ocean,
On the islands forest-covered.

Young and aged talked and wondered,
Well reflected, long debated,
How to live without the moonlight,
Live without the silver sunshine,
In the cold and cheerless Northland,
In the homes of Kalevala.
Long conjectured all the maidens,
Orphans asked the wise for counsel.

Spake a maid to Ilmarinen,
Running to the blacksmith’s furnace:
“Rise, O artist, from thy slumbers,
Hasten from thy couch unworthy;
Forge from gold the Moon for Northland,
Forge anew the Sun from silver;
Cannot live without the moonlight,
Nor without the silver sunshine!”

From his couch arose the artist,
From his couch of stone, the blacksmith,
And began his work of forging,
Forging Sun and Moon for Northland.

Came the ancient Wainamoinen,
In the doorway sat and lingered,
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:
“Blacksmith, my beloved brother,
Thou the only metal-worker,
Tell me why thy magic hammer
Falls so heavy on thine anvil?”
Spake the youthful Ilmarinen:
“Moon of gold and Sun of silver,
I am forging for Wainola;
I shall swing them into ether,
Plant them in the starry heavens.”
Spake the wise, old Wainamoinen:
“Senseless blacksmith of the ages,
Vainly dost thou swing thy hammer,
Vainly rings thy mighty anvil;
Silver will not gleam as sunshine,
Not of gold is born the moonlight!”

Ilmarinen, little heeding,
Ceases not to ply his hammer,
Sun and Moon the artist forges,
Wings the Moon of Magic upward,
Hurls it to the pine-tree branches;
Does not shine without her master.
Then the silver Sun he stations
In an elm-tree on the mountain.
From his forehead drip the sweat-drops,
Perspiration from his fingers,
Through his labors at the anvil
While the Sun and Moon were forging;
But the Sun shone not at morning
From his station in the elm-tree;
And the Moon shone not at evening
From the pine-tree’s topmost branches.
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Let the Fates be now consulted,
And the oracles examined;
Only thus may we discover
Where the Sun and Moon lie hidden.”

Thereupon old Wainamoinen,
Only wise and true magician,
Cut three chips from trunks of alder,
Laid the chips in magic order,
Touched and turned them with his fingers,
Spake these words of master-magic:
“Of my Maker seek I knowledge,
Ask in hope and faith the answer
From the great magician, Ukko:
Tongue of alder, tell me truly,
Symbol of the great Creator,
Where the Sun and Moon are sleeping;
For the Moon shines not in season,
Nor appears the Sun at midday,
From their stations in the sky-vault.
Speak the truth, O magic alder,
Speak not words of man, nor hero,
Hither bring but truthful measures.
Let us form a sacred compact:
If thou speakest me a falsehood,
I will hurl thee to Manala,
Let the nether fires consume thee,
That thine evil signs may perish.”

Thereupon the alder answered,
Spake these words of truthful import:

“Verily the Sun lies hidden
And the golden Moon is sleeping
In the stone-berg of Pohyola,
In the copper-bearing mountain.”
These the words of Wainamoinen:
“I shall go at once to Northland,
To the cold and dark Pohyola,
Bring the Sun and Moon to gladden
All Wainola’s fields and forests.”

Forth he hastens on his journey,
To the dismal Sariola,
To the Northland cold and dreary;
Travels one day, then a second,
So the third from morn till evening,
When appear the gates of Pohya,
With her snow-clad hills and mountains.

Wainamoinen, the magician,
At the river of Pohyola,
Loudly calls the ferry-maiden:
“Bring a boat, O Pohya-daughter,
Bring a strong and trusty vessel,
Row me o’er these chilling waters,
O’er this rough and rapid river!”

But the ferry-maiden heard not,
Did not listen to his calling.
Thereupon old Wainamoinen,
Laid a pile of well-dried brush-wood,
Knots and needles of the fir-tree,
Made a fire beside the river,
Sent the black smoke into heaven,
Curling to the home of Ukko.

Louhi, hostess of the Northland,
Hastened to her chamber window,
Looked upon the bay and river,
Spake these words to her attendants:
“Why the fire across the river
Where the current meets the deep-sea,
Smaller than the fires of foemen,
Larger than the flames of hunters?”

Thereupon a Pohyalander
Hastened from the court of Louhi,
That the cause he might discover,
Bring the sought-for information
To the hostess of Pohyola;
Saw upon the river-border
Some great hero from Wainola.

Wainamoinen saw the stranger,
Called again in tones of thunder:
“Bring a skiff, thou son of Northland,
For the minstrel, Wainamoinen!”
Thus the Pohyalander answered:
“Here no skiffs are lying idle,
Row thyself across the waters,
Use thine arms, and feet, and fingers,
To propel thee o’er the river,
O’er the sacred stream of Pohya.”

Wainamoinen, long reflecting,
Bravely thus soliloquizes:
“I will change my form and features,
Will assume a second body,
Neither man, nor ancient minstrel,
Master of the Northland waters!”

Then the singer, Wainamoinen,
Leaped, a pike, upon the waters,
Quickly swam the rapid river,
Gained the frigid Pohya-border.
There his native form resuming,
Walked he as a mighty hero,
On the dismal isle of Louhi.
Spake the wicked sons of Northland:
“Come thou to Pohyola’s court-room.”

To Pohyola’s court he hastened.
Spake again the sons of evil:
“Come thou to the halls of Louhi!”

To Pohyola’s halls he hastened.
On the latch he laid his fingers,
Set his foot within the fore-hall,
Hastened to the inner chamber,
Underneath the painted rafters,
Where the Northland-heroes gather.
There he found the Pohya-masters
Girded with their swords of battle,
With their spears and battle-axes,
With their fatal bows and arrows,
For the death of Wainamoinen,
Ancient bard, Suwantolainen.
Thus they asked the hero-stranger:
“Magic swimmer of the Northland,
Son of evil, what the message
That thou bringest from thy people,
What thy mission to Pohyola?”

Wainamoinen, old and truthful,
Thus addressed the hosts of Louhi:
“For the Sun I come to Northland,
Come to seek the Moon in Pohya;
Tell me where the Sun lies hidden,
Where the golden Moon is sleeping.”
Spake the evil sons of Pohya:
“Both the Sun and Moon are hidden
In the rock of many colors,
In the copper-bearing mountain,
In a cavern iron-banded,
In the stone-berg of Pohyola,
Nevermore to gain their freedom,
Nevermore to shine in Northland!”
Spake the hero, Wainamoinen:
“If the Sun be not uncovered,
If the Moon leave not her dungeon,
I will challenge all Pohyola
To the test of spear or broadsword,
Let us now our weapons measure!”

Quick the hero of Wainola
Drew his mighty sword of magic;
On its border shone the moonlight,
On its hilt the Sun was shining,
On its back, a neighing stallion,
On its face a cat was mewing,
Beautiful his magic weapon.
Quick the hero-swords are tested,
And the blades are rightly measured
Wainamoinen’s sword is longest
By a single grain of barley,
By a blade of straw, the widest.

To the court-yard rushed the heroes,
Hastened to the deadly combat,
On the plains of Sariola.
Wainamoinen, the magician,
Strikes one blow, and then a second,
Strikes a third time, cuts and conquers.
As the house-maids slice the turnips,
As they lop the heads of cabbage,
As the stalks of flax are broken,
So the heads of Louhi’s heroes
Fall before the magic broadsword
Of the ancient Wainamoinen.

Then the victor from Wainola,
Ancient bard and great magician,
Went to find the Sun in slumber,
And the golden Moon discover,
In the copper-bearing mountains,
In the cavern iron-banded,
In the stone-berg of Pohyola.

He had gone but little distance,
When he found a sea-green island;
On the island stood a birch-tree,
Near the birch-tree stood a pillar
Carved in stone of many colors;
In the pillar, nine large portals
Bolted in a hundred places;
In the rock he found a crevice
Sending forth a gleam of sunlight.
Quick he drew his mighty broadsword,
From the pillar struck three colors,
From the magic of his weapon;
And the pillar fell asunder,
Three the number of the fragments.
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Through the crevice looked and wondered.
In the center of the pillar,
From a scarlet-colored basin,
Noxious serpents beer were drinking,
And the adders eating spices.
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:
“Therefore has Pohyola’s hostess
Little drink to give to strangers,
Since her beer is drank by serpents,
And her spices given to adders.”

Quick he draws his magic fire-blade,
Cuts the vipers green in pieces,
Lops the heads off all the adders,
Speaks these words of master-magic:
“Thus, hereafter, let the serpent
Drink the famous beer of barley,
Feed upon the Northland-spices!”

Wainamoinen, the magician,
The eternal wizard-singer,
Sought to open wide the portals
With the hands and words of magic;
But his hands had lost their cunning,
And his magic gone to others.

Thereupon the ancient minstrel
Quick returning, heavy-hearted,
To his native halls and hamlets,
Thus addressed his brother-heroes:
“Woman, he without his weapons,
With no implements, a weakling!
Sun and Moon have I discovered,
But I could not force the portals
Leading to their rocky cavern
In the copper bearing mountain.”
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Why was I not taken with thee
To become thy war-companion?
Would have been of goodly service,
Would have drawn the bolts or broken,
All the portals to the cavern,
Where the Sun and Moon lie hidden
In the copper-bearing mountain!”

Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,
Thus replied to Lemminkainen:
“Empty words will break no portals,
Draw no bolts of any moment;
Locks and bolts are never broken
With the words of little wisdom!
Greater means than thou commandest
Must be used to free the sunshine,
Free the moonlight from her dungeon.”

Wainamoinen, not discouraged,
Hastened to the forge and smithy,
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:
“O thou famous metal-artist,
Forge for me a magic trident,
Forge from steel a dozen stout-rings,
Master-keys, a goodly number,
Iron bars and heavy hammers,
That the Sun we may uncover
In the copper-bearing mountain,
In the stone-berg of Pohyola.”

Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
The eternal metal-worker,
Forged the needs of Wainamoinen,
Forged for him the magic trident,
Forged from steel a dozen stout-rings,
Master-keys, a goodly number,
Iron bars and heavy hammers,
Not the largest, nor the smallest,
Forged them of the right dimensions.

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Northland’s old and toothless wizard,
Fastened wings upon her shoulders,
As an eagle, sailed the heavens,
Over field, and fen, and forest,
Over Pohya’s many waters,
To the hamlets of Wainola,
To the forge of Ilmarinen.

Quick the famous metal-worker
Went to see if winds were blowing;
Found the winds at peace and silent,
Found an eagle, sable-colored,
Perched upon his window-casement.
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:
“Magic bird, whom art thou seeking,
Why art sitting at my window?”
This the answer of the eagle:
“Art thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,
The eternal iron-forger,
Master of the magic metals,
Northland’s wonder-working artist?”
Ilmarinen gave this answer:
“There is nothing here of wonder,
Since I forged the dome of heaven,
Forged the earth a concave cover!”
Spake again the magic eagle:
“Why this ringing of thine anvil,
Why this knocking of thy hammer,
Tell me what thy hands are forging?”
This the answer of the blacksmith:
“’Tis a collar I am forging
For the neck of wicked Louhi,
Toothless witch of Sariola,
Stealer of the silver sunshine,
Stealer of the golden moonlight;
With this collar I shall bind her
To the iron-rock of Ehstland!”

Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,
Saw misfortune fast approaching,
Saw destruction flying over,
Saw the signs of bad-luck lower;
Quickly winged her way through ether
To her native halls and chambers,
To the darksome Sariola,
There unlocked the massive portals
Where the Sun and Moon were hidden,
In the rock of many colors,
In the cavern iron-banded,
In the copper-bearing mountain.

Then again the wicked Louhi
Changed her withered form and features,
And became a dove of good-luck;
Straightway winged the starry heavens,
Over field, and fen, and forest,
To the meadows of Wainola,
To the plains of Kalevala,
To the forge of Ilmarinen.
This the question of the blacksmith:
“Wherefore comest, dove of good-luck,
What the tidings that thou bringest?”
Thus the magic bird made answer:
“Wherefore come I to thy smithy?
Come to bring the joyful tidings
That the Sun has left his cavern,
Left the rock of many colors,
Left the stone-berg of Pohyola;
That the Moon no more is hidden
In the copper-bearing mountains,
In the caverns iron-banded.”

Straightway hastened Ilmarinen
To the threshold of his smithy,
Quickly scanned the far horizon,
Saw again the silver sunshine,
Saw once more the golden moonlight,
Bringing peace, and joy, and plenty,
To the homes of Kalevala.

Thereupon the blacksmith hastened
To his brother, Wainamoinen,
Spake these words to the magician:
“O thou ancient bard and minstrel,
The eternal wizard-singer,
See, the Sun again is shining,
And the golden Moon is beaming
From their long-neglected places,
From their stations in the sky-vault!”

Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Straightway hastened to the court-yard,
Looked upon the far horizon,
Saw once more the silver sunshine,
Saw again the golden moonlight,
Bringing peace, and joy, and plenty,
To the people of the Northland,
And the minstrel spake these measures:
“Greetings to thee, Sun of fortune,
Greetings to thee, Moon of good-luck,
Welcome sunshine, welcome moonlight,
Golden is the dawn of morning!
Free art thou, O Sun of silver,
Free again, O Moon beloved,
As the sacred cuckoo’s singing,
As the ring-dove’s liquid cooings.

“Rise, thou silver Sun, each morning,
Source of light and life hereafter,
Bring us, daily, joyful greetings,
Fill our homes with peace and plenty,
That our sowing, fishing, hunting,
May be prospered by thy coming.
Travel on thy daily journey,
Let the Moon be ever with thee;
Glide along thy way rejoicing,
End thy journeyings in slumber;
Rest at evening in the ocean,
When the daily cares have ended,
To the good of all thy people,
To the pleasure of Wainola,
To the joy of Kalevala!”




RUNE L.
MARIATTA—WAINAMOINEN’S DEPARTURE.


Mariatta, child of beauty,
Grew to maidenhood in Northland,
In the cabin of her father,
In the chambers of her mother,
Golden ringlets, silver girdles,
Worn against the keys paternal,
Glittering upon her bosom;
Wore away the father’s threshold
With the long robes of her garments;
Wore away the painted rafters
With her beauteous silken ribbons;
Wore away the gilded pillars
With the touching of her fingers;
Wore away the birchen flooring
With the tramping of her fur-shoes.

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Magic maid of little stature,
Guarded well her sacred virtue,
Her sincerity and honor,
Fed upon the dainty whiting,
On the inner bark of birch-wood,
On the tender flesh of lambkins.

When she hastened in the evening
To her milking in the hurdles,
Spake in innocence as follows:
“Never will the snow-white virgin
Milk the kine of one unworthy!”

When she journeyed over snow-fields,
On the seat beside her father,
Spake in purity as follows:
“Not behind a steed unworthy
Will I ever ride the snow-sledge!”

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Lived a virgin with her mother,
As a maiden highly honored,
Lived in innocence and beauty,
Daily drove her flocks to pasture,
Walking with the gentle lambkins.
When the lambkins climbed the mountains,
When they gamboled on the hill-tops,
Stepped the virgin to the meadow,
Skipping through a grove of lindens,
At the calling of the cuckoo,
To the songster’s golden measures.

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Looked about, intently listened,
Sat upon the berry-meadow,
Sat awhile, and meditated
On a hillock by the forest,
And soliloquized as follows:
“Call to me, thou golden cuckoo,
Sing, thou sacred bird of Northland,
Sing, thou silver breasted songster,
Speak, thou strawberry of Ehstland,
Tell how long must I unmarried,
As a shepherdess neglected,
Wander o’er these hills and mountains,
Through these flowery fens and fallows.
Tell me, cuckoo of the woodlands,
Sing to me how many summers
I must live without a husband,
As a shepherdess neglected!”

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Lived a shepherd-maid for ages,
As a virgin with her mother.
Wretched are the lives of shepherds,
Lives of maidens still more wretched,
Guarding flocks upon the mountains;
Serpents creep in bog and stubble,
On the greensward dart the lizards;
But it was no serpent singing,
Nor a sacred lizard calling,
It was but the mountain-berry
Calling to the lonely maiden:
“Come, O virgin, come and pluck me,
Come and take me to thy bosom,
Take me, tinsel-breasted virgin,
Take me, maiden, copper-belted,
Ere the slimy snail devours me,
Ere the black-worm feeds upon me.
Hundreds pass my way unmindful,
Thousands come within my hearing,
Berry-maidens swarm about me,
Children come in countless numbers,
None of these has come to gather,
Come to pluck this ruddy berry.”

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Listened to its gentle pleading,
Ran to pick the berry, calling,
With her fair and dainty fingers,
Saw it smiling near the meadow,
Like a cranberry in feature,
Like a strawberry in flavor;
But the virgin, Mariatta,
Could not pluck the woodland-stranger,
Thereupon she cut a charm-stick,
Downward pressed upon the berry,
When it rose as if by magic,
Rose above her shoes of ermine,
Then above her copper girdle,
Darted upward to her bosom,
Leaped upon the maiden’s shoulder,
On her dimpled chin it rested,
On her lips it perched a moment,
Hastened to her tongue expectant;
To and fro it rocked and lingered,
Thence it hastened on its journey,
Settled in the maiden’s bosom.
Mariatta, child of beauty,
Thus became a bride impregnate,
Wedded to the mountain-berry;
Lingered in her room at morning,
Sat at midday in the darkness,
Hastened to her couch at evening.
Thus the watchful mother wonders:
“What has happened to our Mary,
To our virgin, Mariatta,
That she throws aside her girdle,
Shyly slips through hall and chamber,
Lingers in her room at morning,
Hastens to her couch at evening,
Sits at midday in the darkness?”

On the floor a babe was playing,
And the young child thus made answer:
“This has happened to our Mary,
To our virgin, Mariatta,
This misfortune to the maiden:
She has lingered by the meadows,
Played too long among the lambkins,
Tasted of the mountain-berry.”

Long the virgin watched and waited,
Anxiously the days she counted,
Waiting for the dawn of trouble.
Finally she asked her mother,
These the words of Mariatta:
“Faithful mother, fond and tender,
Mother whom I love and cherish,
Make for me a place befitting,
Where my troubles may be lessened,
And my heavy burdens lightened.”
This the answer of the mother:
“Woe to thee, thou Hisi-maiden,
Since thou art a bride unworthy,
Wedded only to dishonor!”

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Thus replied in truthful measures:
“I am not a maid of Hisi,
I am not a bride unworthy,
Am not wedded to dishonor;
As a shepherdess I wandered
With the lambkins to the glen-wood,
Wandered to the berry-mountain,
Where the strawberry had ripened;
Quick as thought I plucked the berry,
On my tongue I gently laid it,
To and fro it rocked and lingered,
Settled in my heaving bosom.
This the source of all my trouble,
Only cause of my dishonor!”

As the mother was relentless,
Asked the maiden of her father,
This the virgin-mother’s pleading:
“O my father, full of pity,
Source of both my good and evil,
Build for me a place befitting,
Where my troubles may be lessened,
And my heavy burdens lightened.”

This the answer of the father,
Of the father unforgiving:
“Go, thou evil child of Hisi,
Go, thou child of sin and sorrow,
Wedded only to dishonor,
To the Great Bear’s rocky chamber,
To the stone-cave of the growler,
There to lessen all thy troubles,
There to cast thy heavy burdens!”

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Thus made answer to her father:
“I am not a child of Hisi,
I am not a bride unworthy,
Am not wedded to dishonor;
I shall bear a noble hero,
I shall bear a son immortal,
Who will rule among the mighty,
Rule the ancient Wainamoinen.”

Thereupon the virgin-mother
Wandered hither, wandered thither,
Seeking for a place befitting,
Seeking for a worthy birth-place
For her unborn son and hero;
Finally these words she uttered
“Piltti, thou my youngest maiden,
Trustiest of all my servants,
Seek a place within the village,
Ask it of the brook of Sara,
For the troubled Mariatta,
Child of sorrow and misfortune.”

Thereupon the little maiden,
Piltti, spake these words in answer:
“Whom shall I entreat for succor,
Who will lend me his assistance?”
These the words of Mariatta:
“Go and ask it of Ruotus,
Where the reed-brook pours her waters.”

Thereupon the servant, Piltti,
Ever hopeful, ever willing,
Hastened to obey her mistress,
Needing not her exhortation;
Hastened like the rapid river,
Like the flying smoke of battle
To the cabin of Ruotus.
When she walked the hill-tops tottered,
When she ran the mountains trembled;
Shore-reeds danced upon the pasture,
Sandstones skipped about the heather
As the maiden, Piltti, hastened
To the dwelling of Ruotus.

At his table in his cabin
Sat Ruotus, eating, drinking,
In his simple coat of linen.
With his elbows on the table
Spake the wizard in amazement:
“Why hast thou, a maid of evil,
Come to see me in my cavern,
What the message thou art bringing?”

Thereupon the servant, Piltti,
Gave this answer to the wizard:
“Seek I for a spot befitting,
Seek I for a worthy birth-place,
For an unborn child and hero;
Seek it near the Sara-streamlet,
Where the reed-brook pours her waters.

Came the wife of old Ruotus,
Walking with her arms akimbo,
Thus addressed the maiden, Piltti:
“Who is she that asks assistance,
Who the maiden thus dishonored,
What her name, and who her kindred?”

“I have come for Mariatta,
For the worthy virgin-mother.”

Spake the wife of old Ruotus,
Evil-minded, cruel-hearted:
“Occupied are all our chambers,
All our bath-rooms near the reed-brook;
In the mount of fire are couches,
Is a stable in the forest,
For the flaming horse of Hisi;
In the stable is a manger,
Fitting birth-place for the hero
From the wife of cold misfortune,
Worthy couch for Mariatta!”

Thereupon the servant, Piltti,
Hastened to her anxious mistress,
Spake these measures, much regretting.
“There is not a place befitting,
On the silver brook of Sara.
Spake the wife of old Ruotus:
‘Occupied are all the chambers,
All the bath-rooms near the reed-brook;
In the mount of fire are couches,
Is a stable in the forest,
For the flaming horse of Hisi;
In the stable is a manger,
Fitting birth-place for the hero
From the wife of cold misfortune,
Worthy couch for Mariatta.’”

Thereupon the hapless maiden,
Mariatta, virgin-mother,
Fell to bitter tears and murmurs,
Spake these words in depths of sorrow:
“I, alas! must go an outcast,
Wander as a wretched hireling,
Like a servant in dishonor,
Hasten to the burning mountain,
To the stable in the forest,
Make my bed within a manger,
Near the flaming steed of Hisi!”

Quick the hapless virgin-mother,
Outcast from her father’s dwelling,
Gathered up her flowing raiment,
Grasped a broom of birchen branches,
Hastened forth in pain and sorrow
To the stable in the woodlands,
On the heights of Tapio’s mountains,
Spake these words in supplication:
“Come, I pray thee, my Creator,
Only friend in times of trouble,
Come to me and bring protection
To thy child, the virgin-mother,
To the maiden, Mariatta,
In this hour of sore affliction.
Come to me, benignant Ukko,
Come, thou only hope and refuge,
Lest thy guiltless child should perish,
Die the death of the unworthy!”

When the virgin, Mariatta,
Had arrived within the stable
Of the flaming horse of Hisi,
She addressed the steed as follows:
“Breathe, O sympathizing fire-horse,
Breathe on me, the virgin-mother,
Let thy heated breath give moisture,
Let thy pleasant warmth surround me,
Like the vapor of the morning;
Let this pure and helpless maiden
Find a refuge in thy manger!”

Thereupon the horse, in pity,
Breathed the moisture of his nostrils
On the body of the virgin,
Wrapped her in a cloud of vapor,
Gave her warmth and needed comforts,
Gave his aid to the afflicted,
To the virgin, Mariatta.

There the babe was born and cradled
Cradled in a woodland-manger,
Of the virgin, Mariatta,
Pure as pearly dews of morning,
Holy as the stars in heaven.
There the mother rocks her infant,
In his swaddling clothes she wraps him,
Lays him in her robes of linen;
Carefully the babe she nurtures,
Well she guards her much-beloved,
Guards her golden child of beauty,
Her beloved gem of silver.

But alas! the child has vanished,
Vanished while the mother slumbered.
Mariatta, lone and wretched,
Fell to weeping, broken-hearted,
Hastened off to seek her infant.
Everywhere the mother sought him,
Sought her golden child of beauty,
Her beloved gem of silver;
Sought him underneath the millstone,
In the sledge she sought him vainly,
Underneath the sieve she sought him,
Underneath the willow-basket,
Touched the trees, the grass she parted,
Long she sought her golden infant,
Sought him on the fir-tree-mountain,
In the vale, and hill, and heather;
Looks within the clumps of flowers,
Well examines every thicket,
Lifts the juniper and willow,
Lifts the branches of the alder.

Lo! a star has come to meet her,
And the star she thus beseeches:
“O, thou guiding-star of Northland,
Star of hope, by God created,
Dost thou know and wilt thou tell me
Where my darling child has wandered,
Where my holy babe lies hidden?”
Thus the star of Northland answers:
“If I knew, I would not tell thee;
’Tis thy child that me created,
Set me here to watch at evening,
In the cold to shine forever,
Here to twinkle in the darkness.”

Comes the golden Moon to meet her,
And the Moon she thus beseeches:
“Golden Moon, by Ukko fashioned,
Hope and joy of Kalevala,
Dost thou know and wilt thou tell me
Where my darling child has wandered,
Where my holy babe lies hidden?”
Speaks the golden Moon in answer:
“If I knew I would not tell thee;
’Tis thy child that me created,
Here to wander in the darkness,
All alone at eve to wander
On my cold and cheerless journey,
Sleeping only in the daylight,
Shining for the good of others.”

Thereupon the virgin-mother
Falls again to bitter weeping,
Hastens on through fen and forest,
Seeking for her babe departed.

Comes the silver Sun to meet her,
And the Sun she thus addresses:
“Silver Sun by Ukko fashioned,
Source of light and life to Northland,
Dost thou know and wilt thou tell me
Where my darling child has wandered,
Where my holy babe lies hidden?”
Wisely does the Sun make answer:
“Well I know thy babe’s dominions,
Where thy holy child is sleeping,
Where Wainola’s light lies hidden;
’Tis thy child that me created,
Made me king of earth and ether,
Made the Moon and Stars attend me,
Set me here to shine at midday,
Makes me shine in silver raiment,
Lets me sleep and rest at evening;
Yonder is thy golden infant,
There thy holy babe lies sleeping,
Hidden to his belt in water,
Hidden in the reeds and rushes.”

Mariatta, child of beauty,
Virgin-mother of the Northland,
Straightway seeks her babe in Swamp-land,
Finds him in the reeds and rushes;
Takes the young child on her bosom
To the dwelling of her father.

There the infant grew in beauty,
Gathered strength, and light, and wisdom,
All of Suomi saw and wondered.
No one knew what name to give him;
When the mother named him, Flower,
Others named him, Son-of-Sorrow.

When the virgin, Mariatta,
Sought the priesthood to baptize him,
Came an old man, Wirokannas,
With a cup of holy water,
Bringing to the babe his blessing;
And the gray-beard spake as follows:
“I shall not baptize a wizard,
Shall not bless a black-magician
With the drops of holy water;
Let the young child be examined,
Let us know that he is worthy,
Lest he prove the son of witchcraft.”

Thereupon old Wirokannas
Called the ancient Wainamoinen,
The eternal wisdom-singer,
To inspect the infant-wonder,
To report him good or evil.

Wainamoinen, old and faithful,
Carefully the child examined,
Gave this answer to his people:
“Since the child is but an outcast,
Born and cradled in a manger,
Since the berry is his father;
Let him lie upon the heather,
Let him sleep among the rushes,
Let him live upon the mountains;
Take the young child to the marshes,
Dash his head against the birch-tree.”

Then the child of Mariatta,
Only two weeks old, made answer:
“O, thou ancient Wainamoinen,
Son of Folly and Injustice,
Senseless hero of the Northland,
Falsely hast thou rendered judgment.
In thy years, for greater follies,
Greater sins and misdemeanors,
Thou wert not unjustly punished.
In thy former years of trouble,
When thou gavest thine own brother,
For thy selfish life a ransom,
Thus to save thee from destruction,
Then thou wert not sent to Swamp-land
To be murdered for thy follies.
In thy former years of sorrow,
When the beauteous Aino perished
In the deep and boundless blue-sea,
To escape thy persecutions,
Then thou wert not evil-treated,
Wert not banished by thy people.”

Thereupon old Wirokannas,
Of the wilderness the ruler,
Touched the child with holy water,
Gave the wonder-babe his blessing,
Gave him rights of royal heirship,
Free to live and grow a hero,
To become a mighty ruler,
King and Master of Karyala.

As the years passed Wainamoinen
Recognized his waning powers,
Empty-handed, heavy-hearted,
Sang his farewell song to Northland,
To the people of Wainola;
Sang himself a boat of copper,
Beautiful his bark of magic;
At the helm sat the magician,
Sat the ancient wisdom-singer.
Westward, westward, sailed the hero
O’er the blue-back of the waters,
Singing as he left Wainola,
This his plaintive song and echo:
“Suns may rise and set in Suomi,
Rise and set for generations,
When the North will learn my teachings,
Will recall my wisdom-sayings,
Hungry for the true religion.
Then will Suomi need my coming,
Watch for me at dawn of morning,
That I may bring back the Sampo,
Bring anew the harp of joyance,
Bring again the golden moonlight,
Bring again the silver sunshine,
Peace and plenty to the Northland.”

Thus the ancient Wainamoinen,
In his copper-banded vessel,
Left his tribe in Kalevala,
Sailing o’er the rolling billows,
Sailing through the azure vapors,
Sailing through the dusk of evening,
Sailing to the fiery sunset,
To the higher-landed regions,
To the lower verge of heaven;
Quickly gained the far horizon,
Gained the purple-colored harbor.
There his bark he firmly anchored,
Rested in his boat of copper;
But he left his harp of magic,
Left his songs and wisdom-sayings,
To the lasting joy of Suomi.




EPILOGUE


Now I end my measured singing,
Bid my weary tongue keep silence,
Leave my songs to other singers.
Horses have their times of resting
After many hours of labor;
Even sickles will grow weary
When they have been long at reaping;
Waters seek a quiet haven
After running long in rivers;
Fire subsides and sinks in slumber
At the dawning of the morning;
Therefore I should end my singing,
As my song is growing weary,
For the pleasure of the evening,
For the joy of morn arising.

Often I have heard it chanted,
Often heard the words repeated:
“Worthy cataracts and rivers
Never empty all their waters.”
Thus the wise and worthy singer
Sings not all his garnered wisdom;
Better leave unsung some sayings
Than to sing them out of season.

Thus beginning, and thus ending,
Do I roll up all my legends,
Roll them in a ball for safety,
In my memory arrange them,
In their narrow place of resting,
Lest the songs escape unheeded,
While the lock is still unopened,
While the teeth remain unparted,
And the weary tongue is silent.
Why should I sing other legends,
Chant them in the glen and forest,
Sing them on the hill and heather?
Cold and still my golden mother
Lies beneath the meadow, sleeping,
Hears my ancient songs no longer,
Cannot listen to my singing;
Only will the forest listen,
Sacred birches, sighing pine-trees,
Junipers endowed with kindness,
Alder-trees that love to bear me,
With the aspens and the willows.

When my loving mother left me,
Young was I, and low of stature;
Like the cuckoo of the forest,
Like the thrush upon the heather,
Like the lark I learned to twitter,
Learned to sing my simple measures,
Guided by a second mother,
Stern and cold, without affection;
Drove me helpless from my chamber
To the wind-side of her dwelling,
To the north-side of her cottage,
Where the chilling winds in mercy
Carried off the unprotected.
As a lark I learned to wander,
Wander as a lonely song-bird,
Through the forests and the fenlands,
Quietly o’er hill and heather;
Walked in pain about the marshes,
Learned the songs of winds and waters,
Learned the music of the ocean,
And the echoes of the woodlands.

Many men that live to murmur,
Many women live to censure,
Many speak with evil motives;
Many they with wretched voices
Curse me for my wretched singing,
Blame my tongue for speaking wisdom,
Call my ancient songs unworthy,
Blame the songs and curse the singer.
Be not thus, my worthy people,
Blame me not for singing badly,
Unpretending as a minstrel.
I have never had the teaching,
Never lived with ancient heroes,
Never learned the tongues of strangers,
Never claimed to know much wisdom.
Others have had language-masters,
Nature was my only teacher,
Woods and waters my instructors.
Homeless, friendless, lone, and needy,
Save in childhood with my mother,
When beneath her painted rafters,
Where she twirled the flying spindle,
By the work-bench of my brother,
By the window of my sister,
In the cabin of my father,
In my early days of childhood.

Be this as it may, my people,
This may point the way to others,
To the singers better gifted,
For the good of future ages,
For the coming generations,
For the rising folk of Suomi.


THE END

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Lyrical Ballads 1798, by William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Lyrical Ballads 1798

Author: William Wordsworth
        Samuel Taylor Coleridge

Release Date: October 10, 2003 [eBook #9622]
[Most recently updated: June 17, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Jonathan Ingram and PG Distributed Proofreaders

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LYRICAL BALLADS 1798 ***




LYRICAL BALLADS,
WITH A FEW OTHER POEMS.


LONDON

PRINTED FOR J. & A. ARCH, GRACECHURCH-STREET.

1798




ADVERTISEMENT.


It is the honourable characteristic of Poetry that its materials are to
be found in every subject which can interest the human mind. The
evidence of this fact is to be sought, not in the writings of Critics,
but in those of Poets themselves.

The majority of the following poems are to be considered as experiments.
They were written chiefly with a view to ascertain how far the language
of conversation in the middle and lower classes of society is adapted to
the purposes of poetic pleasure. Readers accustomed to the gaudiness and
inane phraseology of many modern writers, if they persist in reading
this book to its conclusion, will perhaps frequently have to struggle
with feelings of strangeness and aukwardness: they will look round for
poetry, and will be induced to enquire by what species of courtesy these
attempts can be permitted to assume that title. It is desirable that
such readers, for their own sakes, should not suffer the solitary word
Poetry, a word of very disputed meaning, to stand in the way of their
gratification; but that, while they are perusing this book, they should
ask themselves if it contains a natural delineation of human passions,
human characters, and human incidents; and if the answer be favourable
to the author’s wishes, that they should consent to be pleased in spite
of that most dreadful enemy to our pleasures, our own pre-established
codes of decision.

Readers of superior judgment may disapprove of the style in which many
of these pieces are executed it must be expected that many lines and
phrases will not exactly suit their taste. It will perhaps appear to
them, that wishing to avoid the prevalent fault of the day, the author
has sometimes descended too low, and that many of his expressions are
too familiar, and not of sufficient dignity. It is apprehended, that the
more conversant the reader is with our elder writers, and with those in
modern times who have been the most successful in painting manners and
passions, the fewer complaints of this kind will he have to make.

An accurate taste in poetry, and in all the other arts, Sir Joshua
Reynolds has observed, is an acquired talent, which can only be produced
by severe thought, and a long continued intercourse with the best models
of composition. This is mentioned not with so ridiculous a purpose as to
prevent the most inexperienced reader from judging for himself; but
merely to temper the rashness of decision, and to suggest that if poetry
be a subject on which much time has not been bestowed, the judgment may
be erroneous, and that in many cases it necessarily will be so.

The tale of Goody Blake and Harry Gill is founded on a
well-authenticated fact which happened in Warwickshire. Of the other
poems in the collection, it may be proper to say that they are either
absolute inventions of the author, or facts which took place within his
personal observation or that of his friends. The poem of the Thorn, as
the reader will soon discover, is not supposed to be spoken in the
author’s own person: the character of the loquacious narrator will
sufficiently shew itself in the course of the story. The Rime of the
Ancyent Marinere was professedly written in imitation of the _style_, as
well as of the spirit of the elder poets; but with a few exceptions, the
Author believes that the language adopted in it has been equally
intelligible for these three last centuries. The lines entitled
Expostulation and Reply, and those which follow, arose out of
conversation with a friend who was somewhat unreasonably attached to
modern books of moral philosophy.




CONTENTS.


  The Rime of the Ancyent Marinere

  The Foster-Mother’s Tale

  Lines left upon a Seat in a Yew-tree which stands near the Lake
      of Esthwaite

  The Nightingale, a Conversational Poem

  The Female Vagrant

  Goody Blake and Harry Gill

  Lines written at a small distance from my House, and sent
      by my little Boy to the Person to whom they are addressed

  Simon Lee, the old Huntsman

  Anecdote for Fathers

  We are seven

  Lines written in early spring

  The Thorn

  The last of the Flock

  The Dungeon

  The Mad Mother

  The Idiot Boy

  Lines written near Richmond, upon the Thames, at Evening

  Expostulation and Reply

  The Tables turned; an Evening Scene, on the same subject

  Old Man travelling

  The Complaint of a forsaken Indian Woman

  The Convict

  Lines written a few miles above Tintern Abbey




THE RIME OF THE ANCYENT MARINERE,
IN SEVEN PARTS.


ARGUMENT.

How a Ship having passed the Line was driven by Storms to the cold
Country towards the South Pole; and how from thence she made her course
to the tropical Latitude of the Great Pacific Ocean; and of the strange
things that befell; and in what manner the Ancyent Marinere came back to
his own Country.


I.

    It is an ancyent Marinere,
      And he stoppeth one of three:
    “By thy long grey beard and thy glittering eye
      “Now wherefore stoppest me?

    “The Bridegroom’s doors are open’d wide
      “And I am next of kin;
    “The Guests are met, the Feast is set,--
      “May’st hear the merry din.--

    But still he holds the wedding-guest--
      There was a Ship, quoth he--
    “Nay, if thou’st got a laughsome tale,
      “Marinere! come with me.”

    He holds him with his skinny hand,
      Quoth he, there was a Ship--
    “Now get thee hence, thou grey-beard Loon!
      “Or my Staff shall make thee skip.”

    He holds him with his glittering eye--
      The wedding guest stood still
    And listens like a three year’s child;
      The Marinere hath his will.

    The wedding-guest sate on a stone,
      He cannot chuse but hear:
    And thus spake on that ancyent man,
      The bright-eyed Marinere.

    The Ship was cheer’d, the Harbour clear’d--
      Merrily did we drop
    Below the Kirk, below the Hill,
      Below the Light-house top.

    The Sun came up upon the left,
      Out of the Sea came he:
    And he shone bright, and on the right
      Went down into the Sea.

    Higher and higher every day,
      Till over the mast at noon--
    The wedding-guest here beat his breast,
      For he heard the loud bassoon.

    The Bride hath pac’d into the Hall,
      Red as a rose is she;
    Nodding their heads before her goes
      The merry Minstralsy.

    The wedding-guest he beat his breast,
      Yet he cannot chuse but hear:
    And thus spake on that ancyent Man,
      The bright-eyed Marinere.

    Listen, Stranger! Storm and Wind,
      A Wind and Tempest strong!
    For days and weeks it play’d us freaks--
      Like Chaff we drove along.

    Listen, Stranger! Mist and Snow,
      And it grew wond’rous cauld:
    And Ice mast-high came floating by
      As green as Emerauld.

    And thro’ the drifts the snowy clifts
      Did send a dismal sheen;
    Ne shapes of men ne beasts we ken--
      The Ice was all between.

    The Ice was here, the Ice was there,
      The Ice was all around:
    It crack’d and growl’d, and roar’d and howl’d--
      Like noises of a swound.

    At length did cross an Albatross,
      Thorough the Fog it came;
    And an it were a Christian Soul,
      We hail’d it in God’s name.

    The Marineres gave it biscuit-worms,
      And round and round it flew:
    The Ice did split with a Thunder-fit;
      The Helmsman steer’d us thro’.

    And a good south wind sprung up behind,
      The Albatross did follow;
    And every day for food or play
      Came to the Marinere’s hollo!

    In mist or cloud on mast or shroud
      It perch’d for vespers nine,
    Whiles all the night thro’ fog-smoke white
      Glimmer’d the white moon-shine.

    “God save thee, ancyent Marinere!
      “From the fiends that plague thee thus--
    “Why look’st thou so?”--with my cross bow
      I shot the Albatross.


II.

    The Sun came up upon the right,
      Out of the Sea came he;
    And broad as a weft upon the left
      Went down into the Sea.

    And the good south wind still blew behind,
      But no sweet Bird did follow
    Ne any day for food or play
      Came to the Marinere’s hollo!

    And I had done an hellish thing
      And it would work ’em woe:
    For all averr’d, I had kill’d the Bird
      That made the Breeze to blow.

    Ne dim ne red, like God’s own head,
      The glorious Sun uprist:
    Then all averr’d, I had kill’d the Bird
      That brought the fog and mist.
    ’Twas right, said they, such birds to slay
      That bring the fog and mist.

    The breezes blew, the white foam flew,
      The furrow follow’d free:
    We were the first that ever burst
      Into that silent Sea.

    Down dropt the breeze, the Sails dropt down,
      ’Twas sad as sad could be
    And we did speak only to break
      The silence of the Sea.

    All in a hot and copper sky
      The bloody sun at noon,
    Right up above the mast did stand,
      No bigger than the moon.

    Day after day, day after day,
      We stuck, ne breath ne motion,
    As idle as a painted Ship
      Upon a painted Ocean.

    Water, water, every where
      And all the boards did shrink;
    Water, water, every where,
      Ne any drop to drink.

    The very deeps did rot: O Christ!
      That ever this should be!
    Yea, slimy things did crawl with legs
      Upon the slimy Sea.

    About, about, in reel and rout
      The Death-fires danc’d at night;
    The water, like a witch’s oils,
      Burnt green and blue and white.

    And some in dreams assured were
      Of the Spirit that plagued us so:
    Nine fathom deep he had follow’d us
      From the Land of Mist and Snow.

    And every tongue thro’ utter drouth
      Was wither’d at the root;
    We could not speak no more than if
      We had been choked with soot.

    Ah wel-a-day! what evil looks
      Had I from old and young;
    Instead of the Cross the Albatross
      About my neck was hung.


III.

    I saw a something in the Sky
      No bigger than my fist;
    At first it seem’d a little speck
      And then it seem’d a mist:
    It mov’d and mov’d, and took at last
      A certain shape, I wist.

    A speck, a mist, a shape, I wist!
      And still it ner’d and ner’d;
    And, an it dodg’d a water-sprite,
      It plung’d and tack’d and veer’d.

    With throat unslack’d, with black lips bak’d
      Ne could we laugh, ne wail:
    Then while thro’ drouth all dumb they stood
    I bit my arm and suck’d the blood
      And cry’d, A sail! a sail!

    With throat unslack’d, with black lips bak’d
      Agape they hear’d me call:
    Gramercy! they for joy did grin
    And all at once their breath drew in
      As they were drinking all.

    She doth not tack from side to side--
      Hither to work us weal
    Withouten wind, withouten tide
      She steddies with upright keel.

    The western wave was all a flame,
      The day was well nigh done!
    Almost upon the western wave
      Rested the broad bright Sun;
    When that strange shape drove suddenly
      Betwixt us and the Sun.

    And strait the Sun was fleck’d with bars
      (Heaven’s mother send us grace)
    As if thro’ a dungeon grate he peer’d
      With broad and burning face.

    Alas! (thought I, and my heart beat loud)
      How fast she neres and neres!
    Are those _her_ Sails that glance in the Sun
      Like restless gossameres?

    Are these _her_ naked ribs, which fleck’d
      The sun that did behind them peer?
    And are these two all, all the crew,
      That woman and her fleshless Pheere?

    _His_ bones were black with many a crack,
      All black and bare, I ween;
    Jet-black and bare, save where with rust
    Of mouldy damps and charnel crust
      They’re patch’d with purple and green.

    _Her_ lips are red, _her_ looks are free,
      _Her_ locks are yellow as gold:
    Her skin is as white as leprosy,
    And she is far liker Death than he;
      Her flesh makes the still air cold.

    The naked Hulk alongside came
      And the Twain were playing dice;
    “The Game is done! I’ve won, I’ve won!”
      Quoth she, and whistled thrice.

    A gust of wind sterte up behind
      And whistled thro’ his bones;
    Thro’ the holes of his eyes and the hole of his mouth
      Half-whistles and half-groans.

    With never a whisper in the Sea
      Off darts the Spectre-ship;
    While clombe above the Eastern bar
    The horned Moon, with one bright Star
      Almost atween the tips.

    One after one by the horned Moon
      (Listen, O Stranger! to me)
    Each turn’d his face with a ghastly pang
      And curs’d me with his ee.

    Four times fifty living men,
      With never a sigh or groan,
    With heavy thump, a lifeless lump
      They dropp’d down one by one.

    Their souls did from their bodies fly,--
      They fled to bliss or woe;
    And every soul it pass’d me by,
      Like the whiz of my Cross-bow.


IV.

    “I fear thee, ancyent Marinere!
      “I fear thy skinny hand;
    “And thou art long and lank and brown
      “As is the ribb’d Sea-sand.

    “I fear thee and thy glittering eye
      “And thy skinny hand so brown”--
    Fear not, fear not, thou wedding guest!
      This body dropt not down.

    Alone, alone, all all alone
      Alone on the wide wide Sea;
    And Christ would take no pity on
      My soul in agony.

    The many men so beautiful,
      And they all dead did lie!
    And a million million slimy things
      Liv’d on--and so did I.

    I look’d upon the rotting Sea,
      And drew my eyes away;
    I look’d upon the eldritch deck,
      And there the dead men lay.

    I look’d to Heaven, and try’d to pray;
      But or ever a prayer had gusht,
    A wicked whisper came and made
      My heart as dry as dust.

    I clos’d my lids and kept them close,
      Till the balls like pulses beat;
    For the sky and the sea, and the sea and the sky
    Lay like a load on my weary eye,
      And the dead were at my feet.

    The cold sweat melted from their limbs,
      Ne rot, ne reek did they;
    The look with which they look’d on me,
      Had never pass’d away.

    An orphan’s curse would drag to Hell
      A spirit from on high:
    But O! more horrible than that
      Is the curse in a dead man’s eye!
    Seven days, seven nights I saw that curse
      And yet I could not die.

    The moving Moon went up the sky
      And no where did abide:
    Softly she was going up
      And a star or two beside--

    Her beams bemock’d the sultry main
      Like morning frosts yspread;
    But where the ship’s huge shadow lay,
    The charmed water burnt alway
      A still and awful red.

    Beyond the shadow of the ship
      I watch’d the water-snakes:
    They mov’d in tracks of shining white;
    And when they rear’d, the elfish light
      Fell off in hoary flakes.

    Within the shadow of the ship
      I watch’d their rich attire:
    Blue, glossy green, and velvet black
    They coil’d and swam; and every track
      Was a flash of golden fire.

    O happy living things! no tongue
      Their beauty might declare:
    A spring of love gusht from my heart,
      And I bless’d them unaware!
    Sure my kind saint took pity on me,
      And I bless’d them unaware.

    The self-same moment I could pray;
      And from my neck so free
    The Albatross fell off, and sank
      Like lead into the sea.


V.

    O sleep, it is a gentle thing
      Belov’d from pole to pole!
    To Mary-queen the praise be yeven
    She sent the gentle sleep from heaven
      That slid into my soul.

    The silly buckets on the deck
      That had so long remain’d,
    I dreamt that they were fill’d with dew
      And when I awoke it rain’d.

    My lips were wet, my throat was cold,
      My garments all were dank;
    Sure I had drunken in my dreams
      And still my body drank.

    I mov’d and could not feel my limbs,
      I was so light, almost
    I thought that I had died in sleep,
      And was a blessed Ghost.

    The roaring wind! it roar’d far off,
      It did not come anear;
    But with its sound it shook the sails
      That were so thin and sere.

    The upper air bursts into life,
      And a hundred fire-flags sheen
    To and fro they are hurried about;
    And to and fro, and in and out
      The stars dance on between.

    The coming wind doth roar more loud;
      The sails do sigh, like sedge:
    The rain pours down from one black cloud
      And the Moon is at its edge.

    Hark! hark! the thick black cloud is cleft,
      And the Moon is at its side:
    Like waters shot from some high crag,
    The lightning falls with never a jag
      A river steep and wide.

    The strong wind reach’d the ship: it roar’d
      And dropp’d down, like a stone!
    Beneath the lightning and the moon
      The dead men gave a groan.

    They groan’d, they stirr’d, they all uprose,
      Ne spake, ne mov’d their eyes:
    It had been strange, even in a dream
      To have seen those dead men rise.

    The helmsman steerd, the ship mov’d on;
      Yet never a breeze up-blew;
    The Marineres all ’gan work the ropes,
      Where they were wont to do:
    They rais’d their limbs like lifeless tools--
      We were a ghastly crew.

    The body of my brother’s son
      Stood by me knee to knee:
    The body and I pull’d at one rope,
      But he said nought to me--
    And I quak’d to think of my own voice
      How frightful it would be!

    The day-light dawn’d--they dropp’d their arms,
      And cluster’d round the mast:
    Sweet sounds rose slowly thro’ their mouths
      And from their bodies pass’d.

    Around, around, flew each sweet sound,
      Then darted to the sun:
    Slowly the sounds came back again
      Now mix’d, now one by one.

    Sometimes a dropping from the sky
      I heard the Lavrock sing;
    Sometimes all little birds that are
    How they seem’d to fill the sea and air
      With their sweet jargoning,

    And now ’twas like all instruments,
      Now like a lonely flute;
    And now it is an angel’s song
      That makes the heavens be mute.

    It ceas’d: yet still the sails made on
      A pleasant noise till noon,
    A noise like of a hidden brook
      In the leafy month of June,
    That to the sleeping woods all night
      Singeth a quiet tune.

    Listen, O listen, thou Wedding-guest!
      “Marinere! thou hast thy will:
    “For that, which comes out of thine eye, doth make
      “My body and soul to be still.”

    Never sadder tale was told
      To a man of woman born:
    Sadder and wiser thou wedding-guest!
      Thou’lt rise to morrow morn.

    Never sadder tale was heard
      By a man of woman born:
    The Marineres all return’d to work
      As silent as beforne.

    The Marineres all ’gan pull the ropes,
      But look at me they n’old:
    Thought I, I am as thin as air--
      They cannot me behold.

    Till noon we silently sail’d on
      Yet never a breeze did breathe:
    Slowly and smoothly went the ship
      Mov’d onward from beneath.

    Under the keel nine fathom deep
      From the land of mist and snow
    The spirit slid: and it was He
      That made the Ship to go.
    The sails at noon left off their tune
      And the Ship stood still also.

    The sun right up above the mast
      Had fix’d her to the ocean:
    But in a minute she ’gan stir
      With a short uneasy motion--
    Backwards and forwards half her length
      With a short uneasy motion.

    Then, like a pawing horse let go,
      She made a sudden bound:
    It flung the blood into my head,
      And I fell into a swound.

    How long in that same fit I lay,
      I have not to declare;
    But ere my living life return’d,
    I heard and in my soul discern’d
      Two voices in the air,

    “Is it he?” quoth one, “Is this the man?
      “By him who died on cross,
    “With his cruel bow he lay’d full low
      “The harmless Albatross.

    “The spirit who ’bideth by himself
      “In the land of mist and snow,
    “He lov’d the bird that lov’d the man
      “Who shot him with his bow.”

    The other was a softer voice,
      As soft as honey-dew:
    Quoth he the man hath penance done,
      And penance more will do.


VI.

          FIRST VOICE.
    “But tell me, tell me! speak again,
      “Thy soft response renewing--
    “What makes that ship drive on so fast?
      “What is the Ocean doing?”

          SECOND VOICE.
    “Still as a Slave before his Lord,
      “The Ocean hath no blast:
    “His great bright eye most silently
      “Up to the moon is cast--

    “If he may know which way to go,
      “For she guides him smooth or grim.
    “See, brother, see! how graciously
      “She looketh down on him.”

          FIRST VOICE.
    “But why drives on that ship so fast
      “Withouten wave or wind?”
          SECOND VOICE.
    “The air is cut away before,
      “And closes from behind.

    “Fly, brother, fly! more high, more high,
      “Or we shall be belated:
    “For slow and slow that ship will go,
      “When the Marinere’s trance is abated.”

    I woke, and we were sailing on
      As in a gentle weather:
    ’Twas night, calm night, the moon was high;
      The dead men stood together.

    All stood together on the deck,
      For a charnel-dungeon fitter:
    All fix’d on me their stony eyes
      That in the moon did glitter.

    The pang, the curse, with which they died,
      Had never pass’d away:
    I could not draw my een from theirs
      Ne turn them up to pray.

    And in its time the spell was snapt,
      And I could move my een:
    I look’d far-forth, but little saw
      Of what might else be seen.

    Like one, that on a lonely road
      Doth walk in fear and dread,
    And having once turn’d round, walks on
      And turns no more his head:
    Because he knows, a frightful fiend
      Doth close behind him tread.

    But soon there breath’d a wind on me,
      Ne sound ne motion made:
    Its path was not upon the sea
      In ripple or in shade.

    It rais’d my hair, it fann’d my cheek,
      Like a meadow-gale of spring--
    It mingled strangely with my fears,
      Yet it felt like a welcoming.

    Swiftly, swiftly flew the ship,
      Yet she sail’d softly too:
    Sweetly, sweetly blew the breeze--
      On me alone it blew.

    O dream of joy! is this indeed
      The light-house top I see?
    Is this the Hill? Is this the Kirk?
      Is this mine own countrée?

    We drifted o’er the Harbour-bar,
      And I with sobs did pray--
    “O let me be awake, my God!
      “Or let me sleep alway!”

    The harbour-bay was clear as glass,
      So smoothly it was strewn!
    And on the bay the moon light lay,
      And the shadow of the moon.

    The moonlight bay was white all o’er,
      Till rising from the same,
    Full many shapes, that shadows were,
      Like as of torches came.

    A little distance from the prow
      Those dark-red shadows were;
    But soon I saw that my own flesh
      Was red as in a glare.

    I turn’d my head in fear and dread,
      And by the holy rood,
    The bodies had advanc’d, and now
      Before the mast they stood.

    They lifted up their stiff right arms,
      They held them strait and tight;
    And each right-arm burnt like a torch,
      A torch that’s borne upright.
    Their stony eye-balls glitter’d on
      In the red and smoky light.

    I pray’d and turn’d my head away
      Forth looking as before.
    There was no breeze upon the bay,
      No wave against the shore.

    The rock shone bright, the kirk no less
      That stands above the rock:
    The moonlight steep’d in silentness
      The steady weathercock.

    And the bay was white with silent light,
      Till rising from the same
    Full many shapes, that shadows were,
      In crimson colours came.

    A little distance from the prow
      Those crimson shadows were:
    I turn’d my eyes upon the deck--
      O Christ! what saw I there?

    Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat;
      And by the Holy rood
    A man all light, a seraph-man,
      On every corse there stood.

    This seraph-band, each wav’d his hand:
      It was a heavenly sight:
    They stood as signals to the land,
      Each one a lovely light:

    This seraph-band, each wav’d his hand,
      No voice did they impart--
    No voice; but O! the silence sank,
      Like music on my heart.

    Eftsones I heard the dash of oars,
      I heard the pilot’s cheer:
    My head was turn’d perforce away
      And I saw a boat appear.

    Then vanish’d all the lovely lights;
      The bodies rose anew:
    With silent pace, each to his place,
      Came back the ghastly crew.
    The wind, that shade nor motion made,
      On me alone it blew.

    The pilot, and the pilot’s boy
      I heard them coming fast:
    Dear Lord in Heaven! it was a joy,
      The dead men could not blast.

    I saw a third--I heard his voice:
      It is the Hermit good!
    He singeth loud his godly hymns
      That he makes in the wood.
    He’ll shrieve my soul, he’ll wash away
      The Albatross’s blood.


VII.

    This Hermit good lives in that wood
      Which slopes down to the Sea.
    How loudly his sweet voice he rears!
    He loves to talk with Marineres
      That come from a far Contrée.

    He kneels at morn and noon and eve--
      He hath a cushion plump:
    It is the moss, that wholly hides
      The rotted old Oak-stump.

    The Skiff-boat ne’rd: I heard them talk,
      “Why, this is strange, I trow!
    “Where are those lights so many and fair
      “That signal made but now?

    “Strange, by my faith!” the Hermit said--
      “And they answer’d not our cheer.
    “The planks look warp’d, and see those sails
      “How thin they are and sere!
    “I never saw aught like to them
      “Unless perchance it were

    “The skeletons of leaves that lag
      “My forest brook along:
    “When the Ivy-tod is heavy with snow,
    “And the Owlet whoops to the wolf below
      “That eats the she-wolf’s young.

    “Dear Lord! it has a fiendish look”--
      (The Pilot made reply)
    “I am a-fear’d.--“Push on, push on!”
      Said the Hermit cheerily.

    The Boat came closer to the Ship,
      But I ne spake ne stirr’d!
    The Boat came close beneath the Ship,
      And strait a sound was heard!

    Under the water it rumbled on,
      Still louder and more dread:
    It reach’d the Ship, it split the bay;
      The Ship went down like lead.

    Stunn’d by that loud and dreadful sound,
      Which sky and ocean smote:
    Like one that hath been seven days drown’d
      My body lay afloat:
    But, swift as dreams, myself I found
      Within the Pilot’s boat.

    Upon the whirl, where sank the Ship,
      The boat spun round and round:
    And all was still, save that the hill
      Was telling of the sound.

    I mov’d my lips: the Pilot shriek’d
      And fell down in a fit.
    The Holy Hermit rais’d his eyes
      And pray’d where he did sit.

    I took the oars: the Pilot’s boy,
      Who now doth crazy go,
    Laugh’d loud and long, and all the while
      His eyes went to and fro,
    “Ha! ha!” quoth he--“full plain I see,
      “The devil knows how to row.”

    And now all in mine own Countrée
      I stood on the firm land!
    The Hermit stepp’d forth from the boat,
      And scarcely he could stand.

    “O shrieve me, shrieve me, holy Man!”
      The Hermit cross’d his brow--
    “Say quick,” quoth he, “I bid thee say
      “What manner man art thou?”

    Forthwith this frame of mine was wrench’d
      With a woeful agony,
    Which forc’d me to begin my tale
      And then it left me free.

    Since then at an uncertain hour,
      Now oftimes and now fewer,
    That anguish comes and makes me tell
      My ghastly aventure.

    I pass, like night, from land to land;
      I have strange power of speech;
    The moment that his face I see
      I know the man that must hear me;
      To him my tale I teach.

    What loud uproar bursts from that door!
      The Wedding-guests are there;
    But in the Garden-bower the Bride
      And Bride-maids singing are:
    And hark the little Vesper-bell
      Which biddeth me to prayer.

    O Wedding-guest! this soul hath been
      Alone on a wide wide sea:
    So lonely ’twas, that God himself
      Scarce seemed there to be.

    O sweeter than the Marriage-feast,
      ’Tis sweeter far to me
    To walk together to the Kirk
      With a goodly company.

    To walk together to the Kirk
      And all together pray,
    While each to his great father bends,
    Old men, and babes, and loving friends,
      And Youths, and Maidens gay.

    Farewell, farewell! but this I tell
      To thee, thou wedding-guest!
    He prayeth well who loveth well
      Both man and bird and beast.

    He prayeth best who loveth best,
      All things both great and small:
    For the dear God, who loveth us,
      He made and loveth all.

    The Marinere, whose eye is bright,
      Whose beard with age is hoar,
    Is gone; and now the wedding-guest
      Turn’d from the bridegroom’s door.

    He went, like one that hath been stunn’d
      And is of sense forlorn:
    A sadder and a wiser man
      He rose the morrow morn.



THE FOSTER-MOTHER’S TALE, A DRAMATIC FRAGMENT.


    FOSTER-MOTHER.
    I never saw the man whom you describe.

    MARIA.
    ’Tis strange! he spake of you familiarly
    As mine and Albert’s common Foster-mother.

    FOSTER-MOTHER.
    Now blessings on the man, whoe’er he be,
    That joined your names with mine! O my sweet lady,
    As often as I think of those dear times
    When you two little ones would stand at eve
    On each side of my chair, and make me learn
    All you had learnt in the day; and how to talk
    In gentle phrase, then bid me sing to you--
    ’Tis more like heaven to come than what _has_ been.

    MARIA.
    O my dear Mother! this strange man has left me
    Troubled with wilder fancies, than the moon
    Breeds in the love-sick maid who gazes at it,
    Till lost in inward vision, with wet eye
    She gazes idly!--But that entrance, Mother!

    FOSTER-MOTHER.
    Can no one hear? It is a perilous tale!

    MARIA.
    No one.

    FOSTER-MOTHER
            My husband’s father told it me,
    Poor old Leoni!--Angels rest his soul!
    He was a woodman, and could fell and saw
    With lusty arm. You know that huge round beam
    Which props the hanging wall of the old chapel?
    Beneath that tree, while yet it was a tree
    He found a baby wrapt in mosses, lined
    With thistle-beards, and such small locks of wool
    As hang on brambles. Well, he brought him home,
    And reared him at the then Lord Velez’ cost.
    And so the babe grew up a pretty boy,
    A pretty boy, but most unteachable--
    And never learnt a prayer, nor told a bead,
    But knew the names of birds, and mocked their notes,
    And whistled, as he were a bird himself:
    And all the autumn ’twas his only play
    To get the seeds of wild flowers, and to plant them
    With earth and water, on the stumps of trees.
    A Friar, who gathered simples in the wood,
    A grey-haired man--he loved this little boy,
    The boy loved him--and, when the Friar taught him,
    He soon could write with the pen: and from that time,
    Lived chiefly at the Convent or the Castle.
    So he became a very learned youth.
    But Oh! poor wretch!--he read, and read, and read,
    ’Till his brain turned--and ere his twentieth year,
    He had unlawful thoughts of many things:
    And though he prayed, he never loved to pray
    With holy men, nor in a holy place--
    But yet his speech, it was so soft and sweet,
    The late Lord Velez ne’er was wearied with him.
    And once, as by the north side of the Chapel
    They stood together, chained in deep discourse,
    The earth heaved under them with such a groan,
    That the wall tottered, and had well-nigh fallen
    Right on their heads. My Lord was sorely frightened;
    A fever seized him, and he made confession
    Of all the heretical and lawless talk
    Which brought this judgment: so the youth was seized
    And cast into that hole. My husband’s father
    Sobbed like a child--it almost broke his heart:
    And once as he was working in the cellar,
    He heard a voice distinctly; ’twas the youth’s,
    Who sung a doleful song about green fields,
    How sweet it were on lake or wild savannah,
    To hunt for food, and be a naked man,
    And wander up and down at liberty.
    He always doted on the youth, and now
    His love grew desperate; and defying death,
    He made that cunning entrance I described:
    And the young man escaped.

    MARIA.
                               ’Tis a sweet tale:
    Such as would lull a listening child to sleep,
    His rosy face besoiled with unwiped tears.--
    And what became of him?

    FOSTER-MOTHER.
                            He went on ship-board
    With those bold voyagers, who made discovery
    Of golden lands. Leoni’s younger brother
    Went likewise, and when he returned to Spain,
    He told Leoni, that the poor mad youth,
    Soon after they arrived in that new world,
    In spite of his dissuasion, seized a boat,
    And all alone, set sail by silent moonlight
    Up a great river, great as any sea,
    And ne’er was heard of more: but ’tis supposed,
    He lived and died among the savage men.



LINES LEFT UPON A SEAT IN A YEW-TREE WHICH STANDS NEAR THE LAKE OF
ESTHWAITE, ON A DESOLATE PART OF THE SHORE, YET COMMANDING A
BEAUTIFUL PROSPECT.


    --Nay, Traveller! rest. This lonely yew-tree stands
    Far from all human dwelling: what if here
    No sparkling rivulet spread the verdant herb;
    What if these barren boughs the bee not loves;
    Yet, if the wind breathe soft, the curling waves,
    That break against the shore, shall lull thy mind
    By one soft impulse saved from vacancy.

                                           --Who he was
    That piled these stones, and with the mossy sod
    First covered o’er, and taught this aged tree,
    Now wild, to bend its arms in circling shade,
    I well remember.--He was one who own’d
    No common soul. In youth, by genius nurs’d,
    And big with lofty views, he to the world
    Went forth, pure in his heart, against the taint
    Of dissolute tongues, ’gainst jealousy, and hate,
    And scorn, against all enemies prepared,
    All but neglect: and so, his spirit damped
    At once, with rash disdain he turned away,
    And with the food of pride sustained his soul
    In solitude.--Stranger! these gloomy boughs
    Had charms for him; and here he loved to sit,
    His only visitants a straggling sheep,
    The stone-chat, or the glancing sand-piper;
    And on these barren rocks, with juniper,
    And heath, and thistle, thinly sprinkled o’er,
    Fixing his downward eye, he many an hour
    A morbid pleasure nourished, tracing here
    An emblem of his own unfruitful life:
    And lifting up his head, he then would gaze
    On the more distant scene; how lovely ’tis
    Thou seest, and he would gaze till it became
    Far lovelier, and his heart could not sustain
    The beauty still more beauteous. Nor, that time,
    Would he forget those beings, to whose minds,
    Warm from the labours of benevolence,
    The world, and man himself, appeared a scene
    Of kindred loveliness: then he would sigh
    With mournful joy, to think that others felt
    What he must never feel: and so, lost man!
    On visionary views would fancy feed,
    Till his eye streamed with tears. In this deep vale
    He died, this seat his only monument.

    If thou be one whose heart the holy forms
    Of young imagination have kept pure,
    Stranger! henceforth be warned; and know, that pride,
    Howe’er disguised in its own majesty,
    Is littleness; that he, who feels contempt
    For any living thing, hath faculties
    Which he has never used; that thought with him
    Is in its infancy. The man, whose eye
    Is ever on himself, doth look on one,
    The least of nature’s works, one who might move
    The wise man to that scorn which wisdom holds
    Unlawful, ever. O, be wiser thou!
    Instructed that true knowledge leads to love,
    True dignity abides with him alone
    Who, in the silent hour of inward thought,
    Can still suspect, and still revere himself,
    In lowliness of heart.



THE NIGHTINGALE;

A CONVERSATIONAL POEM, WRITTEN IN APRIL, 1798.


    No cloud, no relique of the sunken day
    Distinguishes the West, no long thin slip
    Of sullen Light, no obscure trembling hues.
    Come, we will rest on this old mossy Bridge!
    You see the glimmer of the stream beneath,
    But hear no murmuring: it flows silently
    O’er its soft bed of verdure. All is still,
    A balmy night! and tho’ the stars be dim,
    Yet let us think upon the vernal showers
    That gladden the green earth, and we shall find
    A pleasure in the dimness of the stars.
    And hark! the Nightingale begins its song,
    “Most musical, most melancholy”[1] Bird!
    A melancholy Bird? O idle thought!
    In nature there is nothing melancholy.
    --But some night-wandering Man, whose heart was pierc’d
    With the remembrance of a grievous wrong,
    Or slow distemper or neglected love,
    (And so, poor Wretch! fill’d all things with himself
    And made all gentle sounds tell back the tale
    Of his own sorrows) he and such as he
    First nam’d these notes a melancholy strain;
    And many a poet echoes the conceit,
    Poet, who hath been building up the rhyme
    When he had better far have stretch’d his limbs
    Beside a brook in mossy forest-dell
    By sun or moonlight, to the influxes
    Of shapes and sounds and shifting elements
    Surrendering his whole spirit, of his song
    And of his fame forgetful! so his fame
    Should share in nature’s immortality,
    A venerable thing! and so his song
    Should make all nature lovelier, and itself
    Be lov’d, like nature!--But ’twill not be so;
    And youths and maidens most poetical
    Who lose the deep’ning twilights of the spring
    In ball-rooms and hot theatres, they still
    Full of meek sympathy must heave their sighs
    O’er Philomela’s pity-pleading strains.
    My Friend, and my Friend’s Sister! we have learnt
    A different lore: we may not thus profane
    Nature’s sweet voices always full of love
    And joyance! ’Tis the merry Nightingale
    That crowds, and hurries, and precipitates
    With fast thick warble his delicious notes,
    As he were fearful, that an April night
    Would be too short for him to utter forth
    His love-chant, and disburthen his full soul
    Of all its music! And I know a grove
    Of large extent, hard by a castle huge
    Which the great lord inhabits not: and so
    This grove is wild with tangling underwood,
    And the trim walks are broken up, and grass,
    Thin grass and king-cups grow within the paths.
    But never elsewhere in one place I knew
    So many Nightingales: and far and near
    In wood and thicket over the wide grove
    They answer and provoke each other’s songs--
    With skirmish and capricious passagings,
    And murmurs musical and swift jug jug
    And one low piping sound more sweet than all--
    Stirring the air with such an harmony,
    That should you close your eyes, you might almost
    Forget it was not day! On moonlight bushes,
    Whose dewy leafits are but half disclos’d,
    You may perchance behold them on the twigs,
    Their bright, bright eyes, their eyes both bright and full,
    Glistning, while many a glow-worm in the shade
    Lights up her love-torch.

                              A most gentle maid
    Who dwelleth in her hospitable home
    Hard by the Castle, and at latest eve,
    (Even like a Lady vow’d and dedicate
    To something more than nature in the grove)
    Glides thro’ the pathways; she knows all their notes,
    That gentle Maid! and oft, a moment’s space,
    What time the moon was lost behind a cloud,
    Hath heard a pause of silence: till the Moon
    Emerging, hath awaken’d earth and sky
    With one sensation, and those wakeful Birds
    Have all burst forth in choral minstrelsy,
    As if one quick and sudden Gale had swept
    An hundred airy harps! And she hath watch’d
    Many a Nightingale perch giddily
    On blosmy twig still swinging from the breeze,
    And to that motion tune his wanton song,
    Like tipsy Joy that reels with tossing head.

    Farewell, O Warbler! till to-morrow eve,
    And you, my friends! farewell, a short farewell!
    We have been loitering long and pleasantly,
    And now for our dear homes.--That strain again!
    Full fain it would delay me!--My dear Babe,
    Who, capable of no articulate sound,
    Mars all things with his imitative lisp,
    How he would place his hand beside his ear,
    His little hand, the small forefinger up,
    And bid us listen! And I deem it wise
    To make him Nature’s playmate. He knows well
    The evening star: and once when he awoke
    In most distressful mood (some inward pain
    Had made up that strange thing, an infant’s dream)
    I hurried with him to our orchard plot,
    And he beholds the moon, and hush’d at once
    Suspends his sobs, and laughs most silently,
    While his fair eyes that swam with undropt tears
    Did glitter in the yellow moon-beam! Well--
    It is a father’s tale. But if that Heaven
    Should give me life, his childhood shall grow up
    Familiar with these songs, that with the night
    He may associate Joy! Once more farewell,
    Sweet Nightingale! once more, my friends! farewell.


    [1] “_Most musical, most melancholy_.” This passage in Milton
    possesses an excellence far superior to that of mere
    description: it is spoken in the character of the melancholy
    Man, and has therefore a _dramatic_ propriety. The Author makes
    this remark, to rescue himself from the charge of having
    alluded with levity to a line in Milton: a charge than which
    none could be more painful to him, except perhaps that of
    having ridiculed his Bible.



THE FEMALE VAGRANT.


    By Derwent’s side my Father’s cottage stood,
    (The Woman thus her artless story told)
    One field, a flock, and what the neighbouring flood
    Supplied, to him were more than mines of gold.
    Light was my sleep; my days in transport roll’d:
    With thoughtless joy I stretch’d along the shore
    My father’s nets, or watched, when from the fold
    High o’er the cliffs I led my fleecy store,
    A dizzy depth below! his boat and twinkling oar.

    My father was a good and pious man,
    An honest man by honest parents bred,
    And I believe that, soon as I began
    To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed,
    And in his hearing there my prayers I said:
    And afterwards, by my good father taught,
    I read, and loved the books in which I read;
    For books in every neighbouring house I sought,
    And nothing to my mind a sweeter pleasure brought.

    Can I forget what charms did once adorn
    My garden, stored with pease, and mint, and thyme,
    And rose and lilly for the sabbath morn?
    The sabbath bells, and their delightful chime;
    The gambols and wild freaks at shearing time;
    My hen’s rich nest through long grass scarce espied;
    The cowslip-gathering at May’s dewy prime;
    The swans, that, when I sought the water-side,
    From far to meet me came, spreading their snowy pride.

    The staff I yet remember which upbore
    The bending body of my active sire;
    His seat beneath the honeyed sycamore
    When the bees hummed, and chair by winter fire;
    When market-morning came, the neat attire
    With which, though bent on haste, myself I deck’d;
    My watchful dog, whose starts of furious ire,
    When stranger passed, so often I have check’d;
    The red-breast known for years, which at my casement peck’d.

    The suns of twenty summers danced along,--
    Ah! little marked, how fast they rolled away:
    Then rose a mansion proud our woods among,
    And cottage after cottage owned its sway,
    No joy to see a neighbouring house, or stray
    Through pastures not his own, the master took;
    My Father dared his greedy wish gainsay;
    He loved his old hereditary nook,
    And ill could I the thought of such sad parting brook.

    But, when he had refused the proffered gold,
    To cruel injuries he became a prey,
    Sore traversed in whate’er he bought and sold:
    His troubles grew upon him day by day,
    Till all his substance fell into decay.
    His little range of water was denied;[2]
    All but the bed where his old body lay,
    All, all was seized, and weeping, side by side,
    We sought a home where we uninjured might abide.

    Can I forget that miserable hour,
    When from the last hill-top, my sire surveyed,
    Peering above the trees, the steeple tower,
    That on his marriage-day sweet music made?
    Till then he hoped his bones might there be laid,
    Close by my mother in their native bowers:
    Bidding me trust in God, he stood and prayed,--
    I could not pray:--through tears that fell in showers,
    Glimmer’d our dear-loved home, alas! no longer ours!

    There was a youth whom I had loved so long,
    That when I loved him not I cannot say.
    ’Mid the green mountains many and many a song
    We two had sung, like little birds in May.
    When we began to tire of childish play
    We seemed still more and more to prize each other:
    We talked of marriage and our marriage day;
    And I in truth did love him like a brother,
    For never could I hope to meet with such another.

    His father said, that to a distant town
    He must repair, to ply the artist’s trade.
    What tears of bitter grief till then unknown!
    What tender vows our last sad kiss delayed!
    To him we turned:--we had no other aid.
    Like one revived, upon his neck I wept,
    And her whom he had loved in joy, he said
    He well could love in grief: his faith he kept;
    And in a quiet home once more my father slept.

    Four years each day with daily bread was blest,
    By constant toil and constant prayer supplied.
    Three lovely infants lay upon my breast;
    And often, viewing their sweet smiles, I sighed,
    And knew not why. My happy father died
    When sad distress reduced the children’s meal:
    Thrice happy! that from him the grave did hide
    The empty loom, cold hearth, and silent wheel,
    And tears that flowed for ills which patience could not heal.

    ’Twas a hard change, an evil time was come;
    We had no hope, and no relief could gain.
    But soon, with proud parade, the noisy drum
    Beat round, to sweep the streets of want and pain.
    My husband’s arms now only served to strain
    Me and his children hungering in his view:
    In such dismay my prayers and tears were vain:
    To join those miserable men he flew;
    And now to the sea-coast, with numbers more, we drew.

    There foul neglect for months and months we bore,
    Nor yet the crowded fleet its anchor stirred.
    Green fields before us and our native shore,
    By fever, from polluted air incurred,
    Ravage was made, for which no knell was heard.
    Fondly we wished, and wished away, nor knew,
    ’Mid that long sickness, and those hopes deferr’d,
    That happier days we never more must view:
    The parting signal streamed, at last the land withdrew,

    But from delay the summer calms were past.
    On as we drove, the equinoctial deep
    Ran mountains--high before the howling blaft.
    We gazed with terror on the gloomy sleep
    Of them that perished in the whirlwind’s sweep,
    Untaught that soon such anguish must ensue,
    Our hopes such harvest of affliction reap,
    That we the mercy of the waves should rue.
    We reached the western world, a poor, devoted crew.

    Oh! dreadful price of being to resign
    All that is dear _in_ being! better far
    In Want’s most lonely cave till death to pine,
    Unseen, unheard, unwatched by any star;
    Or in the streets and walks where proud men are,
    Better our dying bodies to obtrude,
    Than dog-like, wading at the heels of war,
    Protract a curst existence, with the brood
    That lap (their very nourishment!) their brother’s blood.

    The pains and plagues that on our heads came down,
    Disease and famine, agony and fear,
    In wood or wilderness, in camp or town,
    It would thy brain unsettle even to hear.
    All perished--all, in one remorseless year,
    Husband and children! one by one, by sword
    And ravenous plague, all perished: every tear
    Dried up, despairing, desolate, on board
    A British ship I waked, as from a trance restored.

    Peaceful as some immeasurable plain
    By the first beams of dawning light impress’d,
    In the calm sunshine slept the glittering main.
    The very ocean has its hour of rest,
    That comes not to the human mourner’s breast.
    Remote from man, and storms of mortal care,
    A heavenly silence did the waves invest;
    I looked and looked along the silent air,
    Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair.

    Ah! how unlike those late terrific sleeps!
    And groans, that rage of racking famine spoke,
    Where looks inhuman dwelt on festering heaps!
    The breathing pestilence that rose like smoke!
    The shriek that from the distant battle broke!
    The mine’s dire earthquake, and the pallid host
    Driven by the bomb’s incessant thunder-stroke
    To loathsome vaults, where heart-sick anguish toss’d,
    Hope died, and fear itself in agony was lost!

    Yet does that burst of woe congeal my frame,
    When the dark streets appeared to heave and gape,
    While like a sea the storming army came,
    And Fire from Hell reared his gigantic shape,
    And Murder, by the ghastly gleam, and Rape
    Seized their joint prey, the mother and the child!
    But from these crazing thoughts my brain, escape!
    --For weeks the balmy air breathed soft and mild,
    And on the gliding vessel Heaven and Ocean smiled.

    Some mighty gulph of separation past,
    I seemed transported to another world:--
    A thought resigned with pain, when from the mast
    The impatient mariner the sail unfurl’d,
    And whistling, called the wind that hardly curled
    The silent sea. From the sweet thoughts of home,
    And from all hope I was forever hurled.
    For me--farthest from earthly port to roam
    Was best, could I but shun the spot where man might come.

    And oft, robb’d of my perfect mind, I thought
    At last my feet a resting-place had found:
    Here will I weep in peace, (so fancy wrought,)
    Roaming the illimitable waters round;
    Here watch, of every human friend disowned,
    All day, my ready tomb the ocean-flood--
    To break my dream the vessel reached its bound:
    And homeless near a thousand homes I stood,
    And near a thousand tables pined, and wanted food.

    By grief enfeebled was I turned adrift,
    Helpless as sailor cast on desart rock;
    Nor morsel to my mouth that day did lift,
    Nor dared my hand at any door to knock.
    I lay, where with his drowsy mates, the cock
    From the cross timber of an out-house hung;
    How dismal tolled, that night, the city clock!
    At morn my sick heart hunger scarcely stung,
    Nor to the beggar’s language could I frame my tongue.

    So passed another day, and so the third:
    Then did I try, in vain, the crowd’s resort,
    In deep despair by frightful wishes stirr’d,
    Near the sea-side I reached a ruined fort:
    There, pains which nature could no more support,
    With blindness linked, did on my vitals fall;
    Dizzy my brain, with interruption short
    Of hideous sense; I sunk, nor step could crawl,
    And thence was borne away to neighbouring hospital.

    Recovery came with food: but still, my brain
    Was weak, nor of the past had memory.
    I heard my neighbours, in their beds, complain
    Of many things which never troubled me;
    Of feet still bustling round with busy glee,
    Of looks where common kindness had no part,
    Of service done with careless cruelty,
    Fretting the fever round the languid heart,
    And groans, which, as they said, would make a dead man start.

    These things just served to stir the torpid sense,
    Nor pain nor pity in my bosom raised.
    Memory, though slow, returned with strength; and thence
    Dismissed, again on open day I gazed,
    At houses, men, and common light, amazed.
    The lanes I sought, and as the sun retired,
    Came, where beneath the trees a faggot blazed;
    The wild brood saw me weep, my fate enquired,
    And gave me food, and rest, more welcome, more desired.

    My heart is touched to think that men like these,
    The rude earth’s tenants, were my first relief:
    How kindly did they paint their vagrant ease!
    And their long holiday that feared not grief,
    For all belonged to all, and each was chief.
    No plough their sinews strained; on grating road
    No wain they drove, and yet, the yellow sheaf
    In every vale for their delight was stowed:
    For them, in nature’s meads, the milky udder flowed.

    Semblance, with straw and pauniered ass, they made
    Of potters wandering on from door to door:
    But life of happier sort to me pourtrayed,
    And other joys my fancy to allure;
    The bag-pipe dinning on the midnight moor
    In barn uplighted, and companions boon
    Well met from far with revelry secure,
    In depth of forest glade, when jocund June
    Rolled fast along the sky his warm and genial moon.

    But ill it suited me, in journey dark
    O’er moor and mountain, midnight theft to hatch;
    To charm the surly house-dog’s faithful bark.
    Or hang on tiptoe at the lifted latch;
    The gloomy lantern, and the dim blue match,
    The black disguise, the warning whistle shrill,
    And ear still busy on its nightly watch,
    Were not for me, brought up in nothing ill;
    Besides, on griefs so fresh my thoughts were brooding still.

    What could I do, unaided and unblest?
    Poor Father! gone was every friend of thine:
    And kindred of dead husband are at best
    Small help, and, after marriage such as mine,
    With little kindness would to me incline.
    Ill was I then for toil or service fit:
    With tears whose course no effort could confine,
    By high-way side forgetful would I sit
    Whole hours, my idle arms in moping sorrow knit.

    I lived upon the mercy of the fields,
    And oft of cruelty the sky accused;
    On hazard, or what general bounty yields,
    Now coldly given, now utterly refused,
    The fields I for my bed have often used:
    But, what afflicts my peace with keenest ruth
    Is, that I have my inner self abused,
    Foregone the home delight of constant truth,
    And clear and open soul, so prized in fearless youth.

    Three years a wanderer, often have I view’d,
    In tears, the sun towards that country tend
    Where my poor heart lost all its fortitude:
    And now across this moor my steps I bend--
    Oh! tell me whither--for no earthly friend
    Have I.--She ceased, and weeping turned away,
    As if because her tale was at an end
    She wept;--because she had no more to say
    Of that perpetual weight which on her spirit lay.


    [2] Several of the Lakes in the north of England are let out to
    different Fishermen, in parcels marked out by imaginary lines
    drawn from rock to rock.



GOODY BLAKE, AND HARRY GILL, A TRUE STORY.


    Oh! what’s the matter? what’s the matter?
    What is’t that ails young Harry Gill?
    That evermore his teeth they chatter,
    Chatter, chatter, chatter still.
    Of waistcoats Harry has no lack,
    Good duffle grey, and flannel fine;
    He has a blanket on his back,
    And coats enough to smother nine.

    In March, December, and in July,
    “Tis all the same with Harry Gill;
    The neighbours tell, and tell you truly,
    His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
    At night, at morning, and at noon,
    ’Tis all the same with Harry Gill;
    Beneath the sun, beneath the moon,
    His teeth they chatter, chatter still.

    Young Harry was a lusty drover,
    And who so stout of limb as he?
    His cheeks were red as ruddy clover,
    His voice was like the voice of three.
    Auld Goody Blake was old and poor,
    Ill fedd she was, and thinly clad;
    And any man who pass’d her door,
    Might see how poor a hut she had.

    All day she spun in her poor dwelling,
    And then her three hours’ work at night!
    Alas! ’twas hardly worth the telling,
    It would not pay for candle-light.
    --This woman dwelt in Dorsetshire,
    Her hut was on a cold hill-side,
    And in that country coals are dear,
    For they come far by wind and tide.

    By the same fire to boil their pottage,
    Two poor old dames, as I have known,
    Will often live in one small cottage,
    But she, poor woman, dwelt alone.
    ’Twas well enough when summer came,
    The long, warm, lightsome summer-day,
    Then at her door the _canty_ dame
    Would sit, as any linnet gay.

    But when the ice our streams did fetter,
    Oh! then how her old bones would shake!
    You would have said, if you had met her,
    ’Twas a hard time for Goody Blake.
    Her evenings then were dull and dead;
    Sad case it was, as you may think,
    For very cold to go to bed,
    And then for cold not sleep a wink.

    Oh joy for her! when e’er in winter
    The winds at night had made a rout,
    And scatter’d many a lusty splinter,
    And many a rotten bough about.
    Yet never had she, well or sick,
    As every man who knew her says,
    A pile before-hand, wood or stick,
    Enough to warm her for three days.

    Now, when the frost was past enduring,
    And made her poor old bones to ache,
    Could any thing be more alluring,
    Than an old hedge to Goody Blake?
    And now and then, it must be said,
    When her old bones were cold and chill,
    She left her fire, or left her bed,
    To seek the hedge of Harry Gill.

    Now Harry he had long suspected
    This trespass of old Goody Blake,
    And vow’d that she should be detected,
    And he on her would vengeance take.
    And oft from his warm fire he’d go,
    And to the fields his road would take,
    And there, at night, in frost and snow,
    He watch’d to seize old Goody Blake.

    And once, behind a rick of barley,
    Thus looking out did Harry stand;
    The moon was full and shining clearly,
    And crisp with frost the stubble-land.
    --He hears a noise--he’s all awake--
    Again?--on tip-toe down the hill
    He softly creeps--’Tis Goody Blake,
    She’s at the hedge of Harry Gill.

    Right glad was he when he beheld her:
    Stick after stick did Goody pull,
    He stood behind a bush of elder,
    Till she had filled her apron full.
    When with her load she turned about,
    The bye-road back again to take,
    He started forward with a shout,
    And sprang upon poor Goody Blake.

    And fiercely by the arm he took her,
    And by the arm he held her fast,
    And fiercely by the arm he shook her,
    And cried, “I’ve caught you then at last!”
    Then Goody, who had nothing said,
    Her bundle from her lap let fall;
    And kneeling on the sticks, she pray’d
    To God that is the judge of all.

    She pray’d, her wither’d hand uprearing,
    While Harry held her by the arm--
    “God! who art never out of hearing,
    “O may he never more be warm!”
    The cold, cold moon above her head,
    Thus on her knees did Goody pray,
    Young Harry heard what she had said,
    And icy-cold he turned away.

    He went complaining all the morrow
    That he was cold and very chill:
    His face was gloom, his heart was sorrow,
    Alas! that day for Harry Gill!
    That day he wore a riding-coat,
    But not a whit the warmer he:
    Another was on Thursday brought,
    And ere the Sabbath he had three.

    ’Twas all in vain, a useless matter,
    And blankets were about him pinn’d;
    Yet still his jaws and teeth they clatter,
    Like a loose casement in the wind.
    And Harry’s flesh it fell away;
    And all who see him say ’tis plain,
    That, live as long as live he may,
    He never will be warm again.

    No word to any man he utters,
    A-bed or up, to young or old;
    But ever to himself he mutters,
    “Poor Harry Gill is very cold.”
    A-bed or up, by night or day;
    His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
    Now think, ye farmers all, I pray,
    Of Goody Blake and Harry Gill.



LINES WRITTEN AT A SMALL DISTANCE FROM MY HOUSE, AND SENT BY MY LITTLE
BOY TO THE PERSON TO WHOM THEY ARE ADDRESSED.


   It is the first mild day of March:
   Each minute sweeter than before,
   The red-breast sings from the tall larch
   That stands beside our door.

   There is a blessing in the air,
   Which seems a sense of joy to yield
   To the bare trees, and mountains bare,
   And grass in the green field.

   My Sister! (’tis a wish of mine)
   Now that our morning meal is done,
   Make haste, your morning task resign;
   Come forth and feel the sun.

   Edward will come with you, and pray,
   Put on with speed your woodland dress,
   And bring no book, for this one day
   We’ll give to idleness.

   No joyless forms shall regulate
   Our living Calendar:
   We from to-day, my friend, will date
   The opening of the year.

   Love, now an universal birth.
   From heart to heart is stealing,
   From earth to man, from man to earth,
   --It is the hour of feeling.

   One moment now may give us more
   Than fifty years of reason;
   Our minds shall drink at every pore
   The spirit of the season.

   Some silent laws our hearts may make,
   Which they shall long obey;
   We for the year to come may take
   Our temper from to-day.

   And from the blessed power that rolls
   About, below, above;
   We’ll frame the measure of our souls,
   They shall be tuned to love.

   Then come, my sister! come, I pray,
   With speed put on your woodland dress,
   And bring no book; for this one day
   We’ll give to idleness.



SIMON LEE, THE OLD HUNTSMAN, WITH AN INCIDENT IN WHICH HE WAS CONCERNED.


    In the sweet shire of Cardigan,
    Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,
    An old man dwells, a little man,
    I’ve heard he once was tall.
    Of years he has upon his back,
    No doubt, a burthen weighty;
    He says he is three score and ten,
    But others say he’s eighty.

    A long blue livery-coat has he,
    That’s fair behind, and fair before;
    Yet, meet him where you will, you see
    At once that he is poor.
    Full five and twenty years he lived
    A running huntsman merry;
    And, though he has but one eye left,
    His cheek is like a cherry.

    No man like him the horn could sound.
    And no man was so full of glee;
    To say the least, four counties round
    Had heard of Simon Lee;
    His master’s dead, and no one now
    Dwells in the hall of Ivor;
    Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;
    He is the sole survivor.

    His hunting feats have him bereft
    Of his right eye, as you may see:
    And then, what limbs those feats have left
    To poor old Simon Lee!
    He has no son, he has no child,
    His wife, an aged woman,
    Lives with him, near the waterfall,
    Upon the village common.

    And he is lean and he is sick,
    His little body’s half awry
    His ancles they are swoln and thick
    His legs are thin and dry.
    When he was young he little knew
    Of husbandry or tillage;
    And now he’s forced to work, though weak,
    --The weakest in the village.

    He all the country could outrun,
    Could leave both man and horse behind;
    And often, ere the race was done,
    He reeled and was stone-blind.
    And still there’s something in the world
    At which his heart rejoices;
    For when the chiming hounds are out,
    He dearly loves their voices!

    Old Ruth works out of doors with him,
    And does what Simon cannot do;
    For she, not over stout of limb,
    Is stouter of the two.
    And though you with your utmost skill
    From labour could not wean them,
    Alas! ’tis very little, all
    Which they can do between them.

    Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,
    Not twenty paces from the door,
    A scrap of land they have, but they
    Are poorest of the poor.
    This scrap of land he from the heath
    Enclosed when he was stronger;
    But what avails the land to them,
    Which they can till no longer?

    Few months of life has he in store,
    As he to you will tell,
    For still, the more he works, the more
    His poor old ancles swell.
    My gentle reader, I perceive
    How patiently you’ve waited,
    And I’m afraid that you expect
    Some tale will be related.

    O reader! had you in your mind
    Such stores as silent thought can bring,
    O gentle reader! you would find
    A tale in every thing.
    What more I have to say is short,
    I hope you’ll kindly take it;
    It is no tale; but should you think,
    Perhaps a tale you’ll make it.

    One summer-day I chanced to see
    This old man doing all he could
    About the root of an old tree,
    A stump of rotten wood.
    The mattock totter’d in his hand;
    So vain was his endeavour
    That at the root of the old tree
    He might have worked for ever.

    “You’re overtasked, good Simon Lee,
    Give me your tool” to him I said;
    And at the word right gladly he
    Received my proffer’d aid.
    I struck, and with a single blow
    The tangled root I sever’d,
    At which the poor old man so long
    And vainly had endeavour’d.

    The tears into his eyes were brought,
    And thanks and praises seemed to run
    So fast out of his heart, I thought
    They never would have done.
    --I’ve heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
    With coldness still returning.
    Alas! the gratitude of men
    Has oftner left me mourning.



ANECDOTE FOR FATHERS SHEWING HOW THE ART OF LYING MAY BE TAUGHT.


    I have a boy of five years old,
    His face is fair and fresh to see;
    His limbs are cast in beauty’s mould,
    And dearly he loves me.

    One morn we stroll’d on our dry walk,
    Our quiet house all full in view,
    And held such intermitted talk
    As we are wont to do.

    My thoughts on former pleasures ran;
    I thought of Kilve’s delightful shore,
    My pleasant home, when spring began,
    A long, long year before.

    A day it was when I could bear
    To think, and think, and think again;
    With so much happiness to spare,
    I could not feel a pain.

    My boy was by my side, so slim
    And graceful in his rustic dress!
    And oftentimes I talked to him,
    In very idleness.

    The young lambs ran a pretty race;
    The morning sun shone bright and warm;
    “Kilve,” said I, “was a pleasant place,
    “And so is Liswyn farm.

    “My little boy, which like you more,”
    I said and took him by the arm--
    “Our home by Kilve’s delightful shore,
    “Or here at Liswyn farm?”

    “And tell me, had you rather be,”
    I said and held him by the arm,
    “At Kilve’s smooth shore by the green sea,
    “Or here at Liswyn farm?”

    In careless mood he looked at me,
    While still I held him by the arm,
    And said, “At Kilve I’d rather be
    “Than here at Liswyn farm.”

    “Now, little Edward, say why so;
    My little Edward, tell me why;”
    “I cannot tell, I do not know,”
    “Why this is strange,” said I.

    “For, here are woods and green-hills warm;
    “There surely must some reason be
    “Why you would change sweet Liswyn farm
    “For Kilve by the green sea.”

    At this, my boy, so fair and slim,
    Hung down his head, nor made reply;
    And five times did I say to him,
    “Why? Edward, tell me why?”

    His head he raised--there was in sight,
    It caught his eye, he saw it plain--
    Upon the house-top, glittering bright,
    A broad and gilded vane.

    Then did the boy his tongue unlock,
    And thus to me he made reply;
    “At Kilve there was no weather-cock,
    “And that’s the reason why.”

    Oh dearest, dearest boy! my heart
    For better lore would seldom yearn,
    Could I but teach the hundredth part
    Of what from thee I learn.



WE ARE SEVEN.


    A simple child, dear brother Jim,
    That lightly draws its breath,
    And feels its life in every limb,
    What should it know of death?

    I met a little cottage girl,
    She was eight years old, she said;
    Her hair was thick with many a curl
    That cluster’d round her head.

    She had a rustic, woodland air,
    And she was wildly clad;
    Her eyes were fair, and very fair,
    --Her beauty made me glad.

    “Sisters and brothers, little maid,
    “How many may you be?”
    “How many? seven in all,” she said,
    And wondering looked at me.

    “And where are they, I pray you tell?”
    She answered, “Seven are we,
    “And two of us at Conway dwell,
    “And two are gone to sea.

    “Two of us in the church-yard lie,
    “My sister and my brother,
    “And in the church-yard cottage, I
    “Dwell near them with my mother.”

    “You say that two at Conway dwell,
    “And two are gone to sea,
    “Yet you are seven; I pray you tell
    “Sweet Maid, how this may be?”

    Then did the little Maid reply,
    “Seven boys and girls are we;
    “Two of us in the church-yard lie,
    “Beneath the church-yard tree.”

    “You run about, my little maid,
    “Your limbs they are alive;
    “If two are in the church-yard laid,
    “Then ye are only five.”

    “Their graves are green, they may be seen,”
    The little Maid replied,
    “Twelve steps or more from my mother’s door,
    “And they are side by side.

    “My stockings there I often knit,
    “My ’kerchief there I hem;
    “And there upon the ground I sit--
    “I sit and sing to them.

    “And often after sunset, Sir,
    “When it is light and fair,
    “I take my little porringer,
    “And eat my supper there.

    “The first that died was little Jane;
    “In bed she moaning lay,
    “Till God released her of her pain,
    “And then she went away.

    “So in the church-yard she was laid,
    “And all the summer dry,
    “Together round her grave we played,
    “My brother John and I.

    “And when the ground was white with snow,
    “And I could run and slide,
    “My brother John was forced to go,
    “And he lies by her side.”

    “How many are you then,” said I,
    “If they two are in Heaven?”
    The little Maiden did reply,
    “O Master! we are seven.”

    “But they are dead; those two are dead!
    “Their spirits are in heaven!”
    ’Twas throwing words away; for still
    The little Maid would have her will,
    And said, “Nay, we are seven!”



LINES WRITTEN IN EARLY SPRING.


    I heard a thousand blended notes,
    While in a grove I sate reclined,
    In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts
    Bring sad thoughts to the mind.

    To her fair works did nature link
    The human soul that through me ran;
    And much it griev’d my heart to think
    What man has made of man.

    Through primrose-tufts, in that sweet bower,
    The periwinkle trail’d its wreathes;
    And ’tis my faith that every flower
    Enjoys the air it breathes.

    The birds around me hopp’d and play’d:
    Their thoughts I cannot measure,
    But the least motion which they made,
    It seem’d a thrill of pleasure.

    The budding twigs spread out their fan,
    To catch the breezy air;
    And I must think, do all I can,
    That there was pleasure there.

    If I these thoughts may not prevent,
    If such be of my creed the plan,
    Have I not reason to lament
    What man has made of man?



THE THORN.


I.

    There is a thorn; it looks so old,
    In truth you’d find it hard to say,
    How it could ever have been young,
    It looks so old and grey.
    Not higher than a two-years’ child,
    It stands erect this aged thorn;
    No leaves it has, no thorny points;
    It is a mass of knotted joints,
    A wretched thing forlorn.
    It stands erect, and like a stone
    With lichens it is overgrown.


II.

    Like rock or stone, it is o’ergrown
    With lichens to the very top,
    And hung with heavy tufts of moss,
    A melancholy crop:
    Up from the earth these mosses creep,
    And this poor thorn they clasp it round
    So close, you’d say that they were bent
    With plain and manifest intent,
    To drag it to the ground;
    And all had joined in one endeavour
    To bury this poor thorn for ever.


III.

    High on a mountain’s highest ridge,
    Where oft the stormy winter gale
    Cuts like a scythe, while through the clouds
    It sweeps from vale to vale;
    Not five yards from the mountain-path,
    This thorn you on your left espy;
    And to the left, three yards beyond,
    You see a little muddy pond
    Of water, never dry;
    I’ve measured it from side to side:
    ’Tis three feet long, and two feet wide.


IV.

    And close beside this aged thorn,
    There is a fresh and lovely sight,
    A beauteous heap, a hill of moss,
    Just half a foot in height.
    All lovely colours there you see,
    All colours that were ever seen,
    And mossy network too is there,
    As if by hand of lady fair
    The work had woven been,
    And cups, the darlings of the eye,
    So deep is their vermilion dye.


V.

    Ah me! what lovely tints are there!
    Of olive-green and scarlet bright,
    In spikes, in branches, and in stars,
    Green, red, and pearly white.
    This heap of earth o’ergrown with moss
    Which close beside the thorn you see,
    So fresh in all its beauteous dyes,
    Is like an infant’s grave in size
    As like as like can be:
    But never, never any where,
    An infant’s grave was half so fair.


VI.

    Now would you see this aged thorn,
    This pond and beauteous hill of moss,
    You must take care and chuse your time
    The mountain when to cross.
    For oft there sits, between the heap
    That’s like an infant’s grave in size,
    And that same pond of which I spoke,
    A woman in a scarlet cloak,
    And to herself she cries,
    “Oh misery! oh misery!
    “Oh woe is me! oh misery!”


VII.

    At all times of the day and night
    This wretched woman thither goes,
    And she is known to every star,
    And every wind that blows;
    And there beside the thorn she sits
    When the blue day-light’s in the skies,
    And when the whirlwind’s on the hill,
    Or frosty air is keen and still,
    And to herself she cries,
    “Oh misery! oh misery!
    “Oh woe is me! oh misery!”


VIII.

    “Now wherefore thus, by day and night,
    “In rain, in tempest, and in snow,
    “Thus to the dreary mountain-top
    “Does this poor woman go?
    “And why sits she beside the thorn
    “When the blue day-light’s in the sky,
    “Or when the whirlwind’s on the hill,
    “Or frosty air is keen and still,
    “And wherefore does she cry?--
    “Oh wherefore? wherefore? tell me why
    “Does she repeat that doleful cry?”


IX.

    I cannot tell; I wish I could;
    For the true reason no one knows,
    But if you’d gladly view the spot,
    The spot to which she goes;
    The heap that’s like an infant’s grave,
    The pond--and thorn, so old and grey,
    Pass by her door--’tis seldom shut--
    And if you see her in her hut,
    Then to the spot away!--
    I never heard of such as dare
    Approach the spot when she is there.


X.

    “But wherefore to the mountain-top
    “Can this unhappy woman go,
    “Whatever star is in the skies,
    “Whatever wind may blow?”
    Nay rack your brain--’tis all in vain,
    I’ll tell you every thing I know;
    But to the thorn, and to the pond
    Which is a little step beyond,
    I wish that you would go:
    Perhaps when you are at the place
    You something of her tale may trace.


XI.

    I’ll give you the best help I can:
    Before you up the mountain go,
    Up to the dreary mountain-top,
    I’ll tell you all I know.
    Tis now some two and twenty years,
    Since she (her name is Martha Ray)
    Gave with a maiden’s true good will
    Her company to Stephen Hill;
    And she was blithe and gay,
    And she was happy, happy still
    Whene’er she thought of Stephen Hill.


XII.

    And they had fix’d the wedding-day,
    The morning that must wed them both;
    But Stephen to another maid
    Had sworn another oath;
    And with this other maid to church
    Unthinking Stephen went--
    Poor Martha! on that woful day
    A cruel, cruel fire, they say,
    Into her bones was sent:
    It dried her body like a cinder,
    And almost turn’d her brain to tinder.


XIII.

    They say, full six months after this,
    While yet the summer-leaves were green,
    She to the mountain-top would go,
    And there was often seen.
    ’Tis said, a child was in her womb,
    As now to any eye was plain;
    She was with child, and she was mad,
    Yet often she was sober sad
    From her exceeding pain.
    Oh me! ten thousand times I’d rather
    That he had died, that cruel father!


XIV.

    Sad case for such a brain to hold
    Communion with a stirring child!
    Sad case, as you may think, for one
    Who had a brain so wild!
    Last Christmas when we talked of this,
    Old Farmer Simpson did maintain,
    That in her womb the infant wrought
    About its mother’s heart, and brought
    Her senses back again:
    And when at last her time drew near,
    Her looks were calm, her senses clear.


XV.

    No more I know, I wish I did,
    And I would tell it all to you;
    For what became of this poor child
    There’s none that ever knew:
    And if a child was born or no,
    There’s no one that could ever tell;
    And if ’twas born alive or dead,
    There’s no one knows, as I have said,
    But some remember well,
    That Martha Ray about this time
    Would up the mountain often climb.


XVI.

    And all that winter, when at night
    The wind blew from the mountain-peak,
    ’Twas worth your while, though in the dark,
    The church-yard path to seek:
    For many a time and oft were heard
    Cries coming from the mountain-head,
    Some plainly living voices were,
    And others, I’ve heard many swear,
    Were voices of the dead:
    I cannot think, whate’er they say,
    They had to do with Martha Ray.


XVII.

    But that she goes to this old thorn,
    The thorn which I’ve described to you,
    And there sits in a scarlet cloak,
    I will be sworn is true.
    For one day with my telescope,
    To view the ocean wide and bright,
    When to this country first I came,
    Ere I had heard of Martha’s name,
    I climbed the mountain’s height:
    A storm came on, and I could see
    No object higher than my knee.


XVIII.

    ’Twas mist and rain, and storm and rain,
    No screen, no fence could I discover,
    And then the wind! in faith, it was
    A wind full ten times over.
    I looked around, I thought I saw
    A jutting crag, and oft’ I ran,
    Head-foremost, through the driving rain,
    The shelter of the crag to gain,
    And, as I am a man,
    Instead of jutting crag, I found
    A woman seated on the ground.


XIX.

    I did not speak--I saw her face,
    Her face it was enough for me;
    I turned about and heard her cry,
    “O misery! O misery!”
    And there she sits, until the moon
    Through half the clear blue sky will go,
    And when the little breezes make
    The waters of the pond to shake,
    As all the country know,
    She shudders and you hear her cry,
    “Oh misery! oh misery!


XX.

    “But what’s the thorn? and what’s the pond?
    “And what’s the hill of moss to her?
    “And what’s the creeping breeze that comes
    “The little pond to stir?”
    I cannot tell; but some will say
    She hanged her baby on the tree,
    Some say she drowned it in the pond,
    Which is a little step beyond,
    But all and each agree,
    The little babe was buried there,
    Beneath that hill of moss so fair.


XXI.

    I’ve heard the scarlet moss is red
    With drops of that poor infant’s blood;
    But kill a new-born infant thus!
    I do not think she could.
    Some say, if to the pond you go,
    And fix on it a steady view,
    The shadow of a babe you trace,
    A baby and a baby’s face,
    And that it looks at you;
    Whene’er you look on it, ’tis plain
    The baby looks at you again.


XXII.

    And some had sworn an oath that she
    Should be to public justice brought;
    And for the little infant’s bones
    With spades they would have sought.
    But then the beauteous hill of moss
    Before their eyes began to stir;
    And for full fifty yards around,
    The grass it shook upon the ground;
    But all do still aver
    The little babe is buried there,
    Beneath that hill of moss so fair.


XXIII.

    I cannot tell how this may be,
    But plain it is, the thorn is bound
    With heavy tufts of moss, that strive
    To drag it to the ground.
    And this I know, full many a time,
    When she was on the mountain high,
    By day, and in the silent night,
    When all the stars shone clear and bright,
    That I have heard her cry,
    “Oh misery! oh misery!
    “O woe is me! oh misery!”



THE LAST OF THE FLOCK.


    In distant countries I have been,
    And yet I have not often seen
    A healthy man, a man full grown
    Weep in the public roads alone.
    But such a one, on English ground,
    And in the broad high-way, I met;
    Along the broad high-way he came,
    His cheeks with tears were wet.
    Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad;
    And in his arms a lamb he had.

    He saw me, and he turned aside,
    As if he wished himself to hide:
    Then with his coat he made essay
    To wipe those briny tears away.
    I follow’d him, and said, “My friend
    “What ails you? wherefore weep you so?”
    --“Shame on me, Sir! this lusty lamb,
    He makes my tears to flow.
    To-day I fetched him from the rock;
    He is the last of all my flock.

    When I was young, a single man,
    And after youthful follies ran,
    Though little given to care and thought,
    Yet, so it was, a ewe I bought;
    And other sheep from her I raised,
    As healthy sheep as you might see,
    And then I married, and was rich
    As I could wish to be;
    Of sheep I number’d a full score,
    And every year encreas’d my store.

    Year after year my stock it grew,
    And from this one, this single ewe,
    Full fifty comely sheep I raised,
    As sweet a flock as ever grazed!
    Upon the mountain did they feed;
    They throve, and we at home did thrive.
    --This lusty lamb of all my store
    Is all that is alive:
    And now I care not if we die,
    And perish all of poverty.

    Ten children, Sir! had I to feed,
    Hard labour in a time of need!
    My pride was tamed, and in our grief,
    I of the parish ask’d relief.
    They said I was a wealthy man;
    My sheep upon the mountain fed,
    And it was fit that thence I took
    Whereof to buy us bread:”
    “Do this; how can we give to you,”
    They cried, “what to the poor is due?”

    I sold a sheep as they had said,
    And bought my little children bread,
    And they were healthy with their food;
    For me it never did me good.
    A woeful time it was for me,
    To see the end of all my gains,
    The pretty flock which I had reared
    With all my care and pains,
    To see it melt like snow away!
    For me it was a woeful day.

    Another still! and still another!
    A little lamb, and then its mother!
    It was a vein that never stopp’d,
    Like blood-drops from my heart they dropp’d.
    Till thirty were not left alive
    They dwindled, dwindled, one by one,
    And I may say that many a time
    I wished they all were gone:
    They dwindled one by one away;
    For me it was a woeful day.

    To wicked deeds I was inclined,
    And wicked fancies cross’d my mind,
    And every man I chanc’d to see,
    I thought he knew some ill of me
    No peace, no comfort could I find,
    No ease, within doors or without,
    And crazily, and wearily,
    I went my work about.
    Oft-times I thought to run away;
    For me it was a woeful day.

    Sir! ’twas a precious flock to me,
    As dear as my own children be;
    For daily with my growing store
    I loved my children more and more.
    Alas! it was an evil time;
    God cursed me in my sore distress,
    I prayed, yet every day I thought
    I loved my children less;
    And every week, and every day,
    My flock, it seemed to melt away.

    They dwindled, Sir, sad sight to see!
    From ten to five, from five to three,
    A lamb, a weather, and a ewe;
    And then at last, from three to two;
    And of my fifty, yesterday
    I had but only one,
    And here it lies upon my arm,
    Alas! and I have none;
    To-day I fetched it from the rock;
    It is the last of all my flock.”



THE DUNGEON.


    And this place our forefathers made for man!
    This is the process of our love and wisdom,
    To each poor brother who offends against us--
    Most innocent, perhaps--and what if guilty?
    Is this the only cure? Merciful God?
    Each pore and natural outlet shrivell’d up
    By ignorance and parching poverty,
    His energies roll back upon his heart,
    And stagnate and corrupt; till changed to poison,
    They break out on him, like a loathsome plague-spot;
    Then we call in our pamper’d mountebanks--
    And this is their best cure! uncomforted
    And friendless solitude, groaning and tears,
    And savage faces, at the clanking hour,
    Seen through the steams and vapour of his dungeon,
    By the lamp’s dismal twilight! So he lies
    Circled with evil, till his very soul
    Unmoulds its essence, hopelessly deformed
    By sights of ever more deformity!

    With other ministrations thou, O nature!
    Healest thy wandering and distempered child:
    Thou pourest on him thy soft influences,
    Thy sunny hues, fair forms, and breathing sweets,
    Thy melodies of woods, and winds, and waters,
    Till he relent, and can no more endure
    To be a jarring and a dissonant thing,
    Amid this general dance and minstrelsy;
    But, bursting into tears, wins back his way,
    His angry spirit healed and harmonized
    By the benignant touch of love and beauty.



THE MAD MOTHER.


    Her eyes are wild, her head is bare,
    The sun has burnt her coal-black hair,
    Her eye-brows have a rusty stain,
    And she came far from over the main.
    She has a baby on her arm,
    Or else she were alone;
    And underneath the hay-stack warm,
    And on the green-wood stone,
    She talked and sung the woods among;
    And it was in the English tongue.

    “Sweet babe! they say that I am mad,
    But nay, my heart is far too glad;
    And I am happy when I sing
    Full many a sad and doleful thing:
    Then, lovely baby, do not fear!
    I pray thee have no fear of me,
    But, safe as in a cradle, here
    My lovely baby! thou shalt be,
    To thee I know too much I owe;
    I cannot work thee any woe.

    A fire was once within my brain;
    And in my head a dull, dull pain;
    And fiendish faces one, two, three,
    Hung at my breasts, and pulled at me.
    But then there came a sight of joy;
    It came at once to do me good;
    I waked, and saw my little boy,
    My little boy of flesh and blood;
    Oh joy for me that sight to see!
    For he was here, and only he.

    Suck, little babe, oh suck again!
    It cools my blood; it cools my brain;
    Thy lips I feel them, baby! they
    Draw from my heart the pain away.
    Oh! press me with thy little hand;
    It loosens something at my chest;
    About that tight and deadly band
    I feel thy little fingers press’d.
    The breeze I see is in the tree;
    It comes to cool my babe and me.

    Oh! love me, love me, little boy!
    Thou art thy mother’s only joy;
    And do not dread the waves below,
    When o’er the sea-rock’s edge we go;
    The high crag cannot work me harm,
    Nor leaping torrents when they howl;
    The babe I carry on my arm,
    He saves for me my precious soul;
    Then happy lie, for blest am I;
    Without me my sweet babe would die.

    Then do not fear, my boy! for thee
    Bold as a lion I will be;
    And I will always be thy guide,
    Through hollow snows and rivers wide.
    I’ll build an Indian bower; I know
    The leaves that make the softest bed:
    And if from me thou wilt not go,
    But still be true ’till I am dead,
    My pretty thing! then thou shalt sing,
    As merry as the birds in spring.

    Thy father cares not for my breast,
    ’Tis thine, sweet baby, there to rest:
    ’Tis all thine own! and if its hue
    Be changed, that was so fair to view,
    ’Tis fair enough for thee, my dove!
    My beauty, little child, is flown;
    But thou wilt live with me in love,
    And what if my poor cheek be brown?
    ’Tis well for me; thou canst not see
    How pale and wan it else would be.

    Dread not their taunts, my little life!
    I am thy father’s wedded wife;
    And underneath the spreading tree
    We two will live in honesty.
    If his sweet boy he could forsake,
    With me he never would have stay’d:
    From him no harm my babe can take,
    But he, poor man! is wretched made,
    And every day we two will pray
    For him that’s gone and far away.

    I’ll teach my boy the sweetest things;
    I’ll teach him how the owlet sings.
    My little babe! thy lips are still,
    And thou hast almost suck’d thy fill.
    --Where art thou gone my own dear child?
    What wicked looks are those I see?
    Alas! alas! that look so wild,
    It never, never came from me:
    If thou art mad, my pretty lad,
    Then I must be for ever sad.

    Oh! smile on me, my little lamb!
    For I thy own dear mother am.
    My love for thee has well been tried:
    I’ve sought thy father far and wide.
    I know the poisons of the shade,
    I know the earth-nuts fit for food;
    Then, pretty dear, be not afraid;
    We’ll find thy father in the wood.
    Now laugh and be gay, to the woods away!
    And there, my babe; we’ll live for aye.



THE IDIOT BOY.


    Tis eight o’clock,--a clear March night,
    The moon is up--the sky is blue,
    The owlet in the moonlight air,
    He shouts from nobody knows where;
    He lengthens out his lonely shout,
    Halloo! halloo! a long halloo!

    --Why bustle thus about your door,
    What means this bustle, Betty Foy?
    Why are you in this mighty fret?
    And why on horseback have you set
    Him whom you love, your idiot boy?

    Beneath the moon that shines so bright,
    Till she is tired, let Betty Foy
    With girt and stirrup fiddle-faddle;
    But wherefore set upon a saddle
    Him whom she loves, her idiot boy?

    There’s scarce a soul that’s out of bed;
    Good Betty! put him down again;
    His lips with joy they burr at you,
    But, Betty! what has he to do
    With stirrup, saddle, or with rein?

    The world will say ’tis very idle,
    Bethink you of the time of night;
    There’s not a mother, no not one,
    But when she hears what you have done,
    Oh! Betty she’ll be in a fright.

    But Betty’s bent on her intent,
    For her good neighbour, Susan Gale,
    Old Susan, she who dwells alone,
    Is sick, and makes a piteous moan,
    As if her very life would fail.

    There’s not a house within a mile.
    No hand to help them in distress:
    Old Susan lies a bed in pain,
    And sorely puzzled are the twain,
    For what she ails they cannot guess.

    And Betty’s husband’s at the wood,
    Where by the week he doth abide,
    A woodman in the distant vale;
    There’s none to help poor Susan Gale,
    What must be done? what will betide?

    And Betty from the lane has fetched
    Her pony, that is mild and good,
    Whether he be in joy or pain,
    Feeding at will along the lane,
    Or bringing faggots from the wood.

    And he is all in travelling trim,
    And by the moonlight, Betty Foy
    Has up upon the saddle set,
    The like was never heard of yet,
    Him whom she loves, her idiot boy.

    And he must post without delay
    Across the bridge that’s in the dale,
    And by the church, and o’er the down,
    To bring a doctor from the town,
    Or she will die, old Susan Gale.

    There is no need of boot or spur,
    There is no need of whip or wand,
    For Johnny has his holly-bough,
    And with a hurly-burly now
    He shakes the green bough in his hand.

    And Betty o’er and o’er has told
    The boy who is her best delight,
    Both what to follow, what to shun,
    What do, and what to leave undone,
    How turn to left, and how to right.

    And Betty’s most especial charge,
    Was, “Johnny! Johnny! mind that you
    “Come home again, nor stop at all,
    “Come home again, whate’er befal,
    “My Johnny do, I pray you do.”

    To this did Johnny answer make,
    Both with his head, and with his hand,
    And proudly shook the bridle too,
    And then! his words were not a few,
    Which Betty well could understand.

    And now that Johnny is just going,
    Though Betty’s in a mighty flurry,
    She gently pats the pony’s side,
    On which her idiot boy must ride,
    And seems no longer in a hurry.

    But when the pony moved his legs,
    Oh! then for the poor idiot boy!
    For joy he cannot hold the bridle,
    For joy his head and heels are idle,
    He’s idle all for very joy.

    And while the pony moves his legs,
    In Johnny’s left-hand you may see,
    The green bough’s motionless and dead;
    The moon that shines above his head
    Is not more still and mute than he.

    His heart it was so full of glee,
    That till full fifty yards were gone,
    He quite forgot his holly whip,
    And all his skill in horsemanship,
    Oh! happy, happy, happy John.

    And Betty’s standing at the door,
    And Betty’s face with joy o’erflows,
    Proud of herself, and proud of him,
    She sees him in his travelling trim;
    How quietly her Johnny goes.

    The silence of her idiot boy,
    What hopes it sends to Betty’s heart!
    He’s at the guide-post--he turns right,
    She watches till he’s out of sight,
    And Betty will not then depart.

    Burr, burr--now Johnny’s lips they burr,
    As loud as any mill, or near it,
    Meek as a lamb the pony moves,
    And Johnny makes the noise he loves,
    And Betty listens, glad to hear it.

    Away she hies to Susan Gale:
    And Johnny’s in a merry tune,
    The owlets hoot, the owlets curr,
    And Johnny’s lips they burr, burr, burr,
    And on he goes beneath the moon.

    His steed and he right well agree,
    For of this pony there’s a rumour,
    That should he lose his eyes and ears,
    And should he live a thousand years,
    He never will be out of humour.

    But then he is a horse that thinks!
    And when he thinks his pace is slack;
    Now, though he knows poor Johnny well,
    Yet for his life he cannot tell
    What he has got upon his back.

    So through the moonlight lanes they go,
    And far into the moonlight dale,
    And by the church, and o’er the down,
    To bring a doctor from the town,
    To comfort poor old Susan Gale.

    And Betty, now at Susan’s side,
    Is in the middle of her story,
    What comfort Johnny soon will bring,
    With many a most diverting thing,
    Of Johnny’s wit and Johnny’s glory.

    And Betty’s still at Susan’s side:
    By this time she’s not quite so flurried;
    Demure with porringer and plate
    She sits, as if in Susan’s fate
    Her life and soul were buried.

    But Betty, poor good woman! she,
    You plainly in her face may read it,
    Could lend out of that moment’s store
    Five years of happiness or more,
    To any that might need it.

    But yet I guess that now and then
    With Betty all was not so well,
    And to the road she turns her ears,
    And thence full many a sound she hears,
    Which she to Susan will not tell.

    Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans,
    “As sure as there’s a moon in heaven,”
    Cries Betty, “he’ll be back again;
    “They’ll both be here, ’tis almost ten,
    “They’ll both be here before eleven.”

    Poor Susan moans, poor Susan groans,
    The clock gives warning for eleven;
    ’Tis on the stroke--“If Johnny’s near,”
    Quoth Betty “he will soon be here,
    “As sure as there’s a moon in heaven.”

    The clock is on the stroke of twelve,
    And Johnny is not yet in sight,
    The moon’s in heaven, as Betty sees,
    But Betty is not quite at ease;
    And Susan has a dreadful night.

    And Betty, half an hour ago,
    On Johnny vile reflections cast;
    “A little idle sauntering thing!”
    With other names, an endless string,
    But now that time is gone and past.

    And Betty’s drooping at the heart,
    That happy time all past and gone,
    “How can it be he is so late?
    “The doctor he has made him wait,
    “Susan! they’ll both be here anon.”

    And Susan’s growing worse and worse,
    And Betty’s in a sad quandary;
    And then there’s nobody to say
    If she must go or she must stay:
    --She’s in a sad quandary.

    The clock is on the stroke of one;
    But neither Doctor nor his guide
    Appear along the moonlight road,
    There’s neither horse nor man abroad,
    And Betty’s still at Susan’s side.

    And Susan she begins to fear
    Of sad mischances not a few,
    That Johnny may perhaps be drown’d,
    Or lost perhaps, and never found;
    Which they must both for ever rue.

    She prefaced half a hint of this
    With, “God forbid it should be true!”
    At the first word that Susan said
    Cried Betty, rising from the bed,
    “Susan, I’d gladly stay with you.

    “I must be gone, I must away,
    “Consider, Johnny’s but half-wise;
    “Susan, we must take care of him,
    “If he is hurt in life or limb”--
    “Oh God forbid!” poor Susan cries.

    “What can I do?” says Betty, going,
    “What can I do to ease your pain?
    “Good Susan tell me, and I’ll stay;
    “I fear you’re in a dreadful way,
    “But I shall soon be back again.”

    “Good Betty go, good Betty go,
    “There’s nothing that can ease my pain.”
    Then off she hies, but with a prayer
    That God poor Susan’s life would spare,
    Till she comes back again.

    So, through the moonlight lane she goes,
    And far into the moonlight dale;
    And how she ran, and how she walked,
    And all that to herself she talked,
    Would surely be a tedious tale.

    In high and low, above, below,
    In great and small, in round and square,
    In tree and tower was Johnny seen,
    In bush and brake, in black and green,
    ’Twas Johnny, Johnny, every where.

    She’s past the bridge that’s in the dale,
    And now the thought torments her sore,
    Johnny perhaps his horse forsook,
    To hunt the moon that’s in the brook,
    And never will be heard of more.

    And now she’s high upon the down,
    Alone amid a prospect wide;
    There’s neither Johnny nor his horse,
    Among the fern or in the gorse;
    There’s neither doctor nor his guide.

    “Oh saints! what is become of him?
    “Perhaps he’s climbed into an oak,
    “Where he will stay till he is dead;
    “Or sadly he has been misled,
    “And joined the wandering gypsey-folk.

    “Or him that wicked pony’s carried
    “To the dark cave, the goblins’ hall,
    “Or in the castle he’s pursuing,
    “Among the ghosts, his own undoing;
    “Or playing with the waterfall.”

    At poor old Susan then she railed,
    While to the town she posts away;
    “If Susan had not been so ill,
    “Alas! I should have had him still,
    “My Johnny, till my dying day.”

    Poor Betty! in this sad distemper,
    The doctor’s self would hardly spare,
    Unworthy things she talked and wild,
    Even he, of cattle the most mild,
    The pony had his share.

    And now she’s got into the town,
    And to the doctor’s door she hies;
    Tis silence all on every side;
    The town so long, the town so wide,
    Is silent as the skies.

    And now she’s at the doctor’s door,
    She lifts the knocker, rap, rap, rap,
    The doctor at the casement shews,
    His glimmering eyes that peep and doze;
    And one hand rubs his old night-cap.

    “Oh Doctor! Doctor! where’s my Johnny?”
    “I’m here, what is’t you want with me?”
    “Oh Sir! you know I’m Betty Foy,
    “And I have lost my poor dear boy,
    “You know him--him you often see;

    “He’s not so wise as some folks be,”
    “The devil take his wisdom!” said
    The Doctor, looking somewhat grim,
    “What, woman! should I know of him?”
    And, grumbling, he went back to bed.

    “O woe is me! O woe is me!
    “Here will I die; here will I die;
    “I thought to find my Johnny here,
    “But he is neither far nor near,
    “Oh! what a wretched mother I!”

    She stops, she stands, she looks about,
    Which way to turn she cannot tell.
    Poor Betty! it would ease her pain
    If she had heart to knock again;
    --The clock strikes three--a dismal knell!

    Then up along the town she hies,
    No wonder if her senses fail,
    This piteous news so much it shock’d her,
    She quite forgot to send the Doctor,
    To comfort poor old Susan Gale.

    And now she’s high upon the down,
    And she can see a mile of road,
    “Oh cruel! I’m almost three-score;
    “Such night as this was ne’er before,
    “There’s not a single soul abroad.”

    She listens, but she cannot hear
    The foot of horse, the voice of man;
    The streams with softest sound are flowing,
    The grass you almost hear it growing,
    You hear it now if e’er you can.

    The owlets through the long blue night
    Are shouting to each other still:
    Fond lovers, yet not quite hob nob,
    They lengthen out the tremulous sob,
    That echoes far from hill to hill.

    Poor Betty now has lost all hope,
    Her thoughts are bent on deadly sin;
    A green-grown pond she just has pass’d,
    And from the brink she hurries fast,
    Lest she should drown herself therein.

    And now she sits her down and weeps;
    Such tears she never shed before;
    “Oh dear, dear pony! my sweet joy!
    “Oh carry back my idiot boy!
    “And we will ne’er o’erload thee more.”

    A thought is come into her head;
    “The pony he is mild and good,
    “And we have always used him well;
    “Perhaps he’s gone along the dell,
    “And carried Johnny to the wood.”

    Then up she springs as if on wings;
    She thinks no more of deadly sin;
    If Betty fifty ponds should see,
    The last of all her thoughts would be,
    To drown herself therein.

    Oh reader! now that I might tell
    What Johnny and his horse are doing!
    What they’ve been doing all this time,
    Oh could I put it into rhyme,
    A most delightful tale pursuing!

    Perhaps, and no unlikely thought!
    He with his pony now doth roam
    The cliffs and peaks so high that are,
    To lay his hands upon a star,
    And in his pocket bring it home.

    Perhaps he’s turned himself about,
    His face unto his horse’s tail,
    And still and mute, in wonder lost,
    All like a silent horseman-ghost,
    He travels on along the vale.

    And now, perhaps, he’s hunting sheep,
    A fierce and dreadful hunter he!
    Yon valley, that’s so trim and green,
    In five months’ time, should he be seen,
    A desart wilderness will be.

    Perhaps, with head and heels on fire,
    And like the very soul of evil,
    He’s galloping away, away,
    And so he’ll gallop on for aye,
    The bane of all that dread the devil.

    I to the muses have been bound,
    These fourteen years, by strong indentures;
    Oh gentle muses! let me tell
    But half of what to him befel,
    For sure he met with strange adventures.

    Oh gentle muses! is this kind?
    Why will ye thus my suit repel?
    Why of your further aid bereave me?
    And can ye thus unfriended leave me?
    Ye muses! whom I love so well.

    Who’s yon, that, near the waterfall,
    Which thunders down with headlong force,
    Beneath the moon, yet shining fair,
    As careless as if nothing were,
    Sits upright on a feeding horse?

    Unto his horse, that’s feeding free,
    He seems, I think, the rein to give;
    Of moon or stars he takes no heed;
    Of such we in romances read,
    --’Tis Johnny! Johnny! as I live.

    And that’s the very pony too.
    Where is she, where is Betty Foy?
    She hardly can sustain her fears;
    The roaring water-fall she hears,
    And cannot find her idiot boy.

    Your pony’s worth his weight in gold,
    Then calm your terrors, Betty Foy!
    She’s coming from among the trees,
    And now, all full in view, she sees
    Him whom she loves, her idiot boy.

    And Betty sees the pony too:
    Why stand you thus Good Betty Foy?
    It is no goblin, ’tis no ghost,
    ’Tis he whom you so long have lost,
    He whom you love, your idiot boy.

    She looks again--her arms are up--
    She screams--she cannot move for joy;
    She darts as with a torrent’s force,
    She almost has o’erturned the horse,
    And fast she holds her idiot boy.

    And Johnny burrs and laughs aloud,
    Whether in cunning or in joy,
    I cannot tell; but while he laughs,
    Betty a drunken pleasure quaffs,
    To hear again her idiot boy.

    And now she’s at the pony’s tail,
    And now she’s at the pony’s head,
    On that side now, and now on this,
    And almost stifled with her bliss,
    A few sad tears does Betty shed.

    She kisses o’er and o’er again,
    Him whom she loves, her idiot boy,
    She’s happy here, she’s happy there,
    She is uneasy every where;
    Her limbs are all alive with joy.

    She pats the pony, where or when
    She knows not, happy Betty Foy!
    The little pony glad may be,
    But he is milder far than she,
    You hardly can perceive his joy.

    “Oh! Johnny, never mind the Doctor;
    “You’ve done your best, and that is all.”
    She took the reins, when this was said,
    And gently turned the pony’s head
    From the loud water-fall.

    By this the stars were almost gone,
    The moon was setting on the hill,
    So pale you scarcely looked at her:
    The little birds began to stir,
    Though yet their tongues were still.

    The pony, Betty, and her boy,
    Wind slowly through the woody dale:
    And who is she, be-times abroad,
    That hobbles up the steep rough road?
    Who is it, but old Susan Gale?

    Long Susan lay deep lost in thought,
    And many dreadful fears beset her,
    Both for her messenger and nurse;
    And as her mind grew worse and worse,
    Her body it grew better.

    She turned, she toss’d herself in bed,
    On all sides doubts and terrors met her;
    Point after point did she discuss;
    And while her mind was fighting thus,
    Her body still grew better.

    “Alas! what is become of them?
    “These fears can never be endured,
    “I’ll to the wood.”--The word scarce said,
    Did Susan rise up from her bed,
    As if by magic cured.

    Away she posts up hill and down,
    And to the wood at length is come,
    She spies her friends, she shouts a greeting;
    Oh me! it is a merry meeting,
    As ever was in Christendom.

    The owls have hardly sung their last,
    While our four travellers homeward wend;
    The owls have hooted all night long,
    And with the owls began my song,
    And with the owls must end.

    For while they all were travelling home,
    Cried Betty, “Tell us Johnny, do,
    “Where all this long night you have been,
    “What you have heard, what you have seen,
    “And Johnny, mind you tell us true.”

    Now Johnny all night long had heard
    The owls in tuneful concert strive;
    No doubt too he the moon had seen;
    For in the moonlight he had been
    From eight o’clock till five.

    And thus to Betty’s question, he
    Made answer, like a traveller bold,
    (His very words I give to you,)
    “The cocks did crow to-whoo, to-whoo,
    “And the sun did shine so cold.”
    --Thus answered Johnny in his glory,
    And that was all his travel’s story.



LINES WRITTEN NEAR RICHMOND, UPON THE THAMES, AT EVENING.


    How rich the wave, in front, imprest
    With evening-twilight’s summer hues,
    While, facing thus the crimson west,
    The boat her silent path pursues!
    And see how dark the backward stream!
    A little moment past, so smiling!
    And still, perhaps, with faithless gleam,
    Some other loiterer beguiling.

    Such views the youthful bard allure,
    But, heedless of the following gloom,
    He deems their colours shall endure
    ’Till peace go with him to the tomb.
    --And let him nurse his fond deceit,
    And what if he must die in sorrow!
    Who would not cherish dreams so sweet,
    Though grief and pain may come to-morrow?

    Glide gently, thus for ever glide,
    O Thames! that other bards may see,
    As lovely visions by thy side
    As now, fair river! come to me.
    Oh glide, fair stream! for ever so;
    Thy quiet soul on all bestowing,
    ’Till all our minds for ever flow,
    As thy deep waters now are flowing.

    Vain thought! yet be as now thou art,
    That in thy waters may be seen
    The image of a poet’s heart,
    How bright, how solemn, how serene!
    Such heart did once the poet bless,
    Who, pouring here a[3] _later_ ditty,
    Could find no refuge from distress,
    But in the milder grief of pity.

    Remembrance! as we glide along,
    For him suspend the dashing oar,
    And pray that never child of Song
    May know his freezing sorrows more.
    How calm! how still! the only sound,
    The dripping of the oar suspended!
    --The evening darkness gathers round
    By virtue’s holiest powers attended.


    [3] Collins’s Ode on the death of Thomson, the last written, I
    believe, of the poems which were published during his
    life-time. This Ode is also alluded to in the next stanza.



EXPOSTULATION AND REPLY.


    “Why William, on that old grey stone,
    “Thus for the length of half a day,
    “Why William, sit you thus alone,
    “And dream your time away?

    “Where are your books? that light bequeath’d
    “To beings else forlorn and blind!
    “Up! Up! and drink the spirit breath’d
    “From dead men to their kind.

    “You look round on your mother earth,
    “As if she for no purpose bore you;
    “As if you were her first-born birth,
    “And none had lived before you!”

    One morning thus, by Esthwaite lake,
    When life was sweet I knew not why,
    To me my good friend Matthew spake,
    And thus I made reply.

    “The eye it cannot chuse but see,
    “We cannot bid the ear be still;
    “Our bodies feel, where’er they be,
    “Against, or with our will.

    “Nor less I deem that there are powers,
    “Which of themselves our minds impress,
    “That we can feed this mind of ours,
    “In a wise passiveness.

    “Think you, mid all this mighty sum
    “Of things for ever speaking,
    “That nothing of itself will come,
    “But we must still be seeking?

    “--Then ask not wherefore, here, alone,
    “Conversing as I may,
    “I sit upon this old grey stone,
    “And dream my time away.”



THE TABLES TURNED; AN EVENING SCENE, ON THE SAME SUBJECT.


    Up! up! my friend, and clear your looks,
    Why all this toil and trouble?
    Up! up! my friend, and quit your books,
    Or surely you’ll grow double.

    The sun above the mountain’s head,
    A freshening lustre mellow,
    Through all the long green fields has spread,
    His first sweet evening yellow.

    Books! ’tis a dull and endless strife,
    Come, hear the woodland linnet,
    How sweet his music; on my life
    There’s more of wisdom in it.

    And hark! how blithe the throstle sings!
    And he is no mean preacher;
    Come forth into the light of things,
    Let Nature be your teacher.

    She has a world of ready wealth,
    Our minds and hearts to bless--
    Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health,
    Truth breathed by chearfulness.

    One impulse from a vernal wood
    May teach you more of man;
    Of moral evil and of good,
    Than all the sages can.

    Sweet is the lore which nature brings;
    Our meddling intellect
    Misshapes the beauteous forms of things;
    --We murder to dissect.

    Enough of science and of art;
    Close up these barren leaves;
    Come forth, and bring with you a heart
    That watches and receives.



OLD MAN TRAVELLING; ANIMAL TRANQUILLITY AND DECAY, A SKETCH.


                    The little hedge-row birds,
    That peck along the road, regard him not.
    He travels on, and in his face, his step,
    His gait, is one expression; every limb,
    His look and bending figure, all bespeak
    A man who does not move with pain, but moves
    With thought--He is insensibly subdued
    To settled quiet: he is one by whom
    All effort seems forgotten, one to whom
    Long patience has such mild composure given,
    That patience now doth seem a thing, of which
    He hath no need. He is by nature led
    To peace so perfect, that the young behold
    With envy, what the old man hardly feels.
    --I asked him whither he was bound, and what
    The object of his journey; he replied
    “Sir! I am going many miles to take
    “A last leave of my son, a mariner,
    “Who from a sea-fight has been brought to Falmouth,
    And there is dying in an hospital.”



THE COMPLAINT OF A FORSAKEN INDIAN WOMAN

[_When a Northern Indian, from sickness, is unable to continue his
journey with his companions; he is left behind, covered over with
Deer-skins, and is supplied with water, food, and fuel if the situation
of the place will afford it. He is informed of the track which his
companions intend to pursue, and if he is unable to follow, or overtake
them, he perishes alone in the Desart; unless he should have the good
fortune to fall in with some other Tribes of Indians. It is unnecessary
to add that the females are equally, or still more, exposed to the same
fate. See that very interesting work, _Hearne’s Journey from Hudson’s
Bay to the Northern Ocean_. When the Northern Lights, as the same writer
informs us, vary their position in the air, they make a rustling and a
crackling noise. This circumstance is alluded to in the first stanza of
the following poem._]


    Before I see another day,
    Oh let my body die away!
    In sleep I heard the northern gleams;
    The stars they were among my dreams;
    In sleep did I behold the skies,
    I saw the crackling flashes drive;
    And yet they are upon my eyes,
    And yet I am alive.
    Before I see another day,
    Oh let my body die away!

    My fire is dead: it knew no pain;
    Yet is it dead, and I remain.
    All stiff with ice the ashes lie;
    And they are dead, and I will die.
    When I was well, I wished to live,
    For clothes, for warmth, for food, and fire;
    But they to me no joy can give,
    No pleasure now, and no desire.
    Then here contented will I lie;
    Alone I cannot fear to die.

    Alas! you might have dragged me on
    Another day, a single one!
    Too soon despair o’er me prevailed;
    Too soon my heartless spirit failed;
    When you were gone my limbs were stronger,
    And Oh how grievously I rue,
    That, afterwards, a little longer,
    My friends, I did not follow you!
    For strong and without pain I lay,
    My friends, when you were gone away.

    My child! they gave thee to another,
    A woman who was not thy mother.
    When from my arms my babe they took,
    On me how strangely did he look!
    Through his whole body something ran,
    A most strange something did I see;
    --As if he strove to be a man,
    That he might pull the sledge for me.
    And then he stretched his arms, how wild!
    Oh mercy! like a little child.

    My little joy! my little pride!
    In two days more I must have died.
    Then do not weep and grieve for me;
    I feel I must have died with thee.
    Oh wind that o’er my head art flying,
    The way my friends their course did bend,
    I should not feel the pain of dying,
    Could I with thee a message send.
    Too soon, my friends, you went away;
    For I had many things to say.

    I’ll follow you across the snow,
    You travel heavily and slow:
    In spite of all my weary pain,
    I’ll look upon your tents again.
    My fire is dead, and snowy white
    The water which beside it stood;
    The wolf has come to me to-night,
    And he has stolen away my food.
    For ever left alone am I,
    Then wherefore should I fear to die?

    My journey will be shortly run,
    I shall not see another sun,
    I cannot lift my limbs to know
    If they have any life or no.
    My poor forsaken child! if I
    For once could have thee close to me,
    With happy heart I then would die,
    And my last thoughts would happy be,
    I feel my body die away,
    I shall not see another day.



THE CONVICT.


    The glory of evening was spread through the west;
      --On the slope of a mountain I stood;
    While the joy that precedes the calm season of rest
      Rang loud through the meadow and wood.

    “And must we then part from a dwelling so fair?”
      In the pain of my spirit I said,
    And with a deep sadness I turned, to repair
      To the cell where the convict is laid.

    The thick-ribbed walls that o’ershadow the gate
      Resound; and the dungeons unfold:
    I pause; and at length, through the glimmering grate,
      That outcast of pity behold.

    His black matted head on his shoulder is bent,
      And deep is the sigh of his breath,
    And with stedfast dejection his eyes are intent
      On the fetters that link him to death.

    ’Tis sorrow enough on that visage to gaze.
      That body dismiss’d from his care;
    Yet my fancy has pierced to his heart, and pourtrays
      More terrible images there.

    His bones are consumed, and his life-blood is dried,
      With wishes the past to undo;
    And his crime, through the pains that o’erwhelm him, descried,
      Still blackens and grows on his view.

    When from the dark synod, or blood-reeking field,
      To his chamber the monarch is led,
    All soothers of sense their soft virtue shall yield,
      And quietness pillow his head.

    But if grief, self-consumed, in oblivion would doze,
      And conscience her tortures appease,
    ’Mid tumult and uproar this man must repose;
      In the comfortless vault of disease.

    When his fetters at night have so press’d on his limbs,
      That the weight can no longer be borne,
    If, while a half-slumber his memory bedims,
      The wretch on his pallet should turn,

    While the jail-mastiff howls at the dull clanking chain,
      From the roots of his hair there shall start
    A thousand sharp punctures of cold-sweating pain,
      And terror shall leap at his heart.

    But now he half-raises his deep-sunken eye,
      And the motion unsettles a tear;
    The silence of sorrow it seems to supply,
      And asks of me why I am here.

    “Poor victim! no idle intruder has stood
      “With o’erweening complacence our state to compare,
    “But one, whose first wish is the wish to be good,
      “Is come as a brother thy sorrows to share.

    “At thy name though compassion her nature resign,
      “Though in virtue’s proud mouth thy report be a stain,
    “My care, if the arm of the mighty were mine,
      “Would plant thee where yet thou might’st blossom again.”



LINES WRITTEN A FEW MILES ABOVE TINTERN ABBEY, ON REVISITING THE BANKS
OF THE WYE DURING A TOUR, July 13, 1798.


    Five years have passed; five summers, with the length
    Of five long winters! and again I hear
    These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs
    With a sweet inland murmur.[4]--Once again
    Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs,
    Which on a wild secluded scene impress
    Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect
    The landscape with the quiet of the sky.
    The day is come when I again repose
    Here, under this dark sycamore, and view
    These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts,
    Which, at this season, with their unripe fruits,
    Among the woods and copses lose themselves,
    Nor, with their green and simple hue, disturb
    The wild green landscape. Once again I see
    These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines
    Of sportive wood run wild; these pastoral farms
    Green to the very door; and wreathes of smoke
    Sent up, in silence, from among the trees,
    With some uncertain notice, as might seem,
    Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods,
    Or of some hermit’s cave, where by his fire
    The hermit sits alone.

                           Though absent long,
    These forms of beauty have not been to me,
    As is a landscape to a blind man’s eye:
    But oft, in lonely rooms, and mid the din
    Of towns and cities, I have owed to them,
    In hours of weariness, sensations sweet,
    Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart,
    And passing even into my purer mind
    With tranquil restoration:--feelings too
    Of unremembered pleasure; such, perhaps,
    As may have had no trivial influence
    On that best portion of a good man’s life;
    His little, nameless, unremembered acts
    Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust,
    To them I may have owed another gift,
    Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood,
    In which the burthen of the mystery,
    In which the heavy and the weary weight
    Of all this unintelligible world
    Is lighten’d:--that serene and blessed mood,
    In which the affections gently lead us on,
    Until, the breath of this corporeal frame,
    And even the motion of our human blood
    Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
    In body, and become a living soul:
    While with an eye made quiet by the power
    Of harmony, and the deep power of joy,
    We see into the life of things.

                                    If this
    Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft,
    In darkness, and amid the many shapes
    Of joyless day-light; when the fretful stir
    Unprofitable, and the fever of the world,
    Have hung upon the beatings of my heart,
    How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee
    O sylvan Wye! Thou wanderer through the woods,
    How often has my spirit turned to thee!

    And now, with gleams of half-extinguish’d thought,
    With many recognitions dim and faint,
    And somewhat of a sad perplexity,
    The picture of the mind revives again:
    While here I stand, not only with the sense
    Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts
    That in this moment there is life and food
    For future years. And so I dare to hope
    Though changed, no doubt, from what I was, when first
    I came among these hills; when like a roe
    I bounded o’er the mountains, by the sides
    Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,
    Wherever nature led; more like a man
    Flying from something that he dreads, than one
    Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then
    (The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,
    And their glad animal movements all gone by,)
    To me was all in all.--I cannot paint
    What then I was. The sounding cataract
    Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,
    The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
    Their colours and their forms, were then to me
    An appetite: a feeling and a love,
    That had no need of a remoter charm,
    By thought supplied, or any interest
    Unborrowed from the eye.--That time is past,
    And all its aching joys are now no more,
    And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this
    Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur: other gifts
    Have followed, for such loss, I would believe,
    Abundant recompence. For I have learned
    To look on nature, not as in the hour
    Of thoughtless youth, but hearing oftentimes
    The still, sad music of humanity,
    Not harsh nor grating, though of ample power
    To chasten and subdue. And I have felt
    A presence that disturbs me with the joy
    Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
    Of something far more deeply interfused,
    Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
    And the round ocean, and the living air,
    And the blue sky, and in the mind of man,
    A motion and a spirit, that impels
    All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
    And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still
    A lover of the meadows and the woods,
    And mountains; and of all that we behold
    From this green earth; of all the mighty world
    Of eye and ear, both what they half-create,[5]
    And what perceive; well pleased to recognize
    In nature and the language of the sense,
    The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
    The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
    Of all my moral being.

                           Nor, perchance,
    If I were not thus taught, should I the more
    Suffer my genial spirits to decay:
    For thou art with me, here, upon the banks
    Of this fair river; thou, my dearest Friend,
    My dear, dear Friend, and in thy voice I catch
    The language of my former heart, and read
    My former pleasures in the shooting lights
    Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while
    May I behold in thee what I was once,
    My dear, dear Sister! And this prayer I make,
    Knowing that Nature never did betray
    The heart that loved her; ’tis her privilege,
    Through all the years of this our life, to lead
    From joy to joy: for she can so inform
    The mind that is within us, so impress
    With quietness and beauty, and so feed
    With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
    Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men,
    Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all
    The dreary intercourse of daily life,
    Shall e’er prevail against us, or disturb
    Our chearful faith that all which we behold
    Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon
    Shine on thee in thy solitary walk;
    And let the misty mountain winds be free
    To blow against thee: and in after years,
    When these wild ecstasies shall be matured
    Into a sober pleasure, when thy mind
    Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms,
    Thy memory be as a dwelling-place
    For all sweet sounds and harmonies; Oh! then,
    If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief,
    Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts
    Of tender joy wilt thou remember me,
    And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance,
    If I should be, where I no more can hear
    Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams
    Of past existence, wilt thou then forget
    That on the banks of this delightful stream
    We stood together; and that I, so long
    A worshipper of Nature, hither came,
    Unwearied in that service: rather say
    With warmer love, oh! with far deeper zeal
    Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget,
    That after many wanderings, many years
    Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs,
    And this green pastoral landscape, were to me
    More dear, both for themselves, and for thy sake.


    [4] The river is not affected by the tides a few miles above
    Tintern.

    [5] This line has a close resemblance to an admirable line of
    Young, the exact expression of which I cannot recollect.



END.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LYRICAL BALLADS 1798 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

I. LIFE.


I.

SUCCESS.

[Published in "A Masque of Poets"
at the request of "H.H.," the author's
fellow-townswoman and friend.]

Success is counted sweetest
By those who ne'er succeed.
To comprehend a nectar
Requires sorest need.

Not one of all the purple host
Who took the flag to-day
Can tell the definition,
So clear, of victory,

As he, defeated, dying,
On whose forbidden ear
The distant strains of triumph
Break, agonized and clear!





II.

Our share of night to bear,
Our share of morning,
Our blank in bliss to fill,
Our blank in scorning.

Here a star, and there a star,
Some lose their way.
Here a mist, and there a mist,
Afterwards -- day!





III.

ROUGE ET NOIR.

Soul, wilt thou toss again?
By just such a hazard
Hundreds have lost, indeed,
But tens have won an all.

Angels' breathless ballot
Lingers to record thee;
Imps in eager caucus
Raffle for my soul.





IV.

ROUGE GAGNE.

'T is so much joy! 'T is so much joy!
If I should fail, what poverty!
And yet, as poor as I
Have ventured all upon a throw;
Have gained! Yes! Hesitated so
This side the victory!

Life is but life, and death but death!
Bliss is but bliss, and breath but breath!
And if, indeed, I fail,
At least to know the worst is sweet.
Defeat means nothing but defeat,
No drearier can prevail!

And if I gain, -- oh, gun at sea,
Oh, bells that in the steeples be,
At first repeat it slow!
For heaven is a different thing
Conjectured, and waked sudden in,
And might o'erwhelm me so!





V.

Glee! The great storm is over!
Four have recovered the land;
Forty gone down together
Into the boiling sand.

Ring, for the scant salvation!
Toll, for the bonnie souls, --
Neighbor and friend and bridegroom,
Spinning upon the shoals!

How they will tell the shipwreck
When winter shakes the door,
Till the children ask, "But the forty?
Did they come back no more?"

Then a silence suffuses the story,
And a softness the teller's eye;
And the children no further question,
And only the waves reply.





VI.

If I can stop one heart from breaking,
I shall not live in vain;
If I can ease one life the aching,
Or cool one pain,
Or help one fainting robin
Unto his nest again,
I shall not live in vain.





VII.

ALMOST!

Within my reach!
I could have touched!
I might have chanced that way!
Soft sauntered through the village,
Sauntered as soft away!
So unsuspected violets
Within the fields lie low,
Too late for striving fingers
That passed, an hour ago.





VIII.

A wounded deer leaps highest,
I've heard the hunter tell;
'T is but the ecstasy of death,
And then the brake is still.

The smitten rock that gushes,
The trampled steel that springs;
A cheek is always redder
Just where the hectic stings!

Mirth is the mail of anguish,
In which it cautions arm,
Lest anybody spy the blood
And "You're hurt" exclaim!





IX.

The heart asks pleasure first,
And then, excuse from pain;
And then, those little anodynes
That deaden suffering;

And then, to go to sleep;
And then, if it should be
The will of its Inquisitor,
The liberty to die.





X.

IN A LIBRARY.

A precious, mouldering pleasure 't is
To meet an antique book,
In just the dress his century wore;
A privilege, I think,

His venerable hand to take,
And warming in our own,
A passage back, or two, to make
To times when he was young.

His quaint opinions to inspect,
His knowledge to unfold
On what concerns our mutual mind,
The literature of old;

What interested scholars most,
What competitions ran
When Plato was a certainty.
And Sophocles a man;

When Sappho was a living girl,
And Beatrice wore
The gown that Dante deified.
Facts, centuries before,

He traverses familiar,
As one should come to town
And tell you all your dreams were true;
He lived where dreams were sown.

His presence is enchantment,
You beg him not to go;
Old volumes shake their vellum heads
And tantalize, just so.





XI.

Much madness is divinest sense
To a discerning eye;
Much sense the starkest madness.
'T is the majority
In this, as all, prevails.
Assent, and you are sane;
Demur, -- you're straightway dangerous,
And handled with a chain.
XII.

I asked no other thing,
No other was denied.
I offered Being for it;
The mighty merchant smiled.

Brazil? He twirled a button,
Without a glance my way:
"But, madam, is there nothing else
That we can show to-day?"





XIII.

EXCLUSION.

The soul selects her own society,
Then shuts the door;
On her divine majority
Obtrude no more.

Unmoved, she notes the chariot's pausing
At her low gate;
Unmoved, an emperor is kneeling
Upon her mat.

I've known her from an ample nation
Choose one;
Then close the valves of her attention
Like stone.





XIV.

THE SECRET.

Some things that fly there be, --
Birds, hours, the bumble-bee:
Of these no elegy.

Some things that stay there be, --
Grief, hills, eternity:
Nor this behooveth me.

There are, that resting, rise.
Can I expound the skies?
How still the riddle lies!





XV.

THE LONELY HOUSE.

I know some lonely houses off the road
A robber 'd like the look of, --
Wooden barred,
And windows hanging low,
Inviting to
A portico,
Where two could creep:
One hand the tools,
The other peep
To make sure all's asleep.
Old-fashioned eyes,
Not easy to surprise!

How orderly the kitchen 'd look by night,
With just a clock, --
But they could gag the tick,
And mice won't bark;
And so the walls don't tell,
None will.

A pair of spectacles ajar just stir --
An almanac's aware.
Was it the mat winked,
Or a nervous star?
The moon slides down the stair
To see who's there.

There's plunder, -- where?
Tankard, or spoon,
Earring, or stone,
A watch, some ancient brooch
To match the grandmamma,
Staid sleeping there.

Day rattles, too,
Stealth's slow;
The sun has got as far
As the third sycamore.
Screams chanticleer,
"Who's there?"
And echoes, trains away,
Sneer -- "Where?"
While the old couple, just astir,
Fancy the sunrise left the door ajar!





XVI.

To fight aloud is very brave,
But gallanter, I know,
Who charge within the bosom,
The cavalry of woe.

Who win, and nations do not see,
Who fall, and none observe,
Whose dying eyes no country
Regards with patriot love.

We trust, in plumed procession,
For such the angels go,
Rank after rank, with even feet
And uniforms of snow.





XVII.

DAWN.

When night is almost done,
And sunrise grows so near
That we can touch the spaces,
It 's time to smooth the hair

And get the dimples ready,
And wonder we could care
For that old faded midnight
That frightened but an hour.





XVIII.

THE BOOK OF MARTYRS.

Read, sweet, how others strove,
Till we are stouter;
What they renounced,
Till we are less afraid;
How many times they bore
The faithful witness,
Till we are helped,
As if a kingdom cared!

Read then of faith
That shone above the fagot;
Clear strains of hymn
The river could not drown;
Brave names of men
And celestial women,
Passed out of record
Into renown!





XIX.

THE MYSTERY OF PAIN.

Pain has an element of blank;
It cannot recollect
When it began, or if there were
A day when it was not.

It has no future but itself,
Its infinite realms contain
Its past, enlightened to perceive
New periods of pain.





XX.

I taste a liquor never brewed,
From tankards scooped in pearl;
Not all the vats upon the Rhine
Yield such an alcohol!

Inebriate of air am I,
And debauchee of dew,
Reeling, through endless summer days,
From inns of molten blue.

When landlords turn the drunken bee
Out of the foxglove's door,
When butterflies renounce their drams,
I shall but drink the more!

Till seraphs swing their snowy hats,
And saints to windows run,
To see the little tippler
Leaning against the sun!





XXI.

A BOOK.

He ate and drank the precious words,
His spirit grew robust;
He knew no more that he was poor,
Nor that his frame was dust.
He danced along the dingy days,
And this bequest of wings
Was but a book. What liberty
A loosened spirit brings!





XXII.

I had no time to hate, because
The grave would hinder me,
And life was not so ample I
Could finish enmity.

Nor had I time to love; but since
Some industry must be,
The little toil of love, I thought,
Was large enough for me.





XXIII.

UNRETURNING.

'T was such a little, little boat
That toddled down the bay!
'T was such a gallant, gallant sea
That beckoned it away!

'T was such a greedy, greedy wave
That licked it from the coast;
Nor ever guessed the stately sails
My little craft was lost!





XXIV.

Whether my bark went down at sea,
Whether she met with gales,
Whether to isles enchanted
She bent her docile sails;

By what mystic mooring
She is held to-day, --
This is the errand of the eye
Out upon the bay.





XXV.

Belshazzar had a letter, --
He never had but one;
Belshazzar's correspondent
Concluded and begun
In that immortal copy
The conscience of us all
Can read without its glasses
On revelation's wall.





XXVI.

The brain within its groove
Runs evenly and true;
But let a splinter swerve,
'T were easier for you
To put the water back
When floods have slit the hills,
And scooped a turnpike for themselves,
And blotted out the mills!






II. LOVE.


I.

MINE.

Mine by the right of the white election!
Mine by the royal seal!
Mine by the sign in the scarlet prison
Bars cannot conceal!

Mine, here in vision and in veto!
Mine, by the grave's repeal
Titled, confirmed, -- delirious charter!
Mine, while the ages steal!





II.

BEQUEST.

You left me, sweet, two legacies, --
A legacy of love
A Heavenly Father would content,
Had He the offer of;

You left me boundaries of pain
Capacious as the sea,
Between eternity and time,
Your consciousness and me.





III.

Alter? When the hills do.
Falter? When the sun
Question if his glory
Be the perfect one.

Surfeit? When the daffodil
Doth of the dew:
Even as herself, O friend!
I will of you!





IV.

SUSPENSE.

Elysium is as far as to
The very nearest room,
If in that room a friend await
Felicity or doom.

What fortitude the soul contains,
That it can so endure
The accent of a coming foot,
The opening of a door!





V.

SURRENDER.

Doubt me, my dim companion!
Why, God would be content
With but a fraction of the love
Poured thee without a stint.
The whole of me, forever,
What more the woman can, --
Say quick, that I may dower thee
With last delight I own!

It cannot be my spirit,
For that was thine before;
I ceded all of dust I knew, --
What opulence the more
Had I, a humble maiden,
Whose farthest of degree
Was that she might,
Some distant heaven,
Dwell timidly with thee!





VI.

If you were coming in the fall,
I'd brush the summer by
With half a smile and half a spurn,
As housewives do a fly.

If I could see you in a year,
I'd wind the months in balls,
And put them each in separate drawers,
Until their time befalls.

If only centuries delayed,
I'd count them on my hand,
Subtracting till my fingers dropped
Into Van Diemen's land.

If certain, when this life was out,
That yours and mine should be,
I'd toss it yonder like a rind,
And taste eternity.

But now, all ignorant of the length
Of time's uncertain wing,
It goads me, like the goblin bee,
That will not state its sting.





VII.

WITH A FLOWER.

I hide myself within my flower,
That wearing on your breast,
You, unsuspecting, wear me too --
And angels know the rest.

I hide myself within my flower,
That, fading from your vase,
You, unsuspecting, feel for me
Almost a loneliness.





VIII.

PROOF.

That I did always love,
I bring thee proof:
That till I loved
I did not love enough.

That I shall love alway,
I offer thee
That love is life,
And life hath immortality.

This, dost thou doubt, sweet?
Then have I
Nothing to show
But Calvary.





IX.

Have you got a brook in your little heart,
Where bashful flowers blow,
And blushing birds go down to drink,
And shadows tremble so?

And nobody knows, so still it flows,
That any brook is there;
And yet your little draught of life
Is daily drunken there.

Then look out for the little brook in March,
When the rivers overflow,
And the snows come hurrying from the hills,
And the bridges often go.

And later, in August it may be,
When the meadows parching lie,
Beware, lest this little brook of life
Some burning noon go dry!





X.

TRANSPLANTED.

As if some little Arctic flower,
Upon the polar hem,
Went wandering down the latitudes,
Until it puzzled came
To continents of summer,
To firmaments of sun,
To strange, bright crowds of flowers,
And birds of foreign tongue!
I say, as if this little flower
To Eden wandered in --
What then? Why, nothing, only,
Your inference therefrom!





XI.

THE OUTLET.

My river runs to thee:
Blue sea, wilt welcome me?

My river waits reply.
Oh sea, look graciously!

I'll fetch thee brooks
From spotted nooks, --

Say, sea,
Take me!





XII.

IN VAIN.

I cannot live with you,
It would be life,
And life is over there
Behind the shelf

The sexton keeps the key to,
Putting up
Our life, his porcelain,
Like a cup

Discarded of the housewife,
Quaint or broken;
A newer Sevres pleases,
Old ones crack.

I could not die with you,
For one must wait
To shut the other's gaze down, --
You could not.

And I, could I stand by
And see you freeze,
Without my right of frost,
Death's privilege?

Nor could I rise with you,
Because your face
Would put out Jesus',
That new grace

Glow plain and foreign
On my homesick eye,
Except that you, than he
Shone closer by.

They'd judge us -- how?
For you served Heaven, you know,
Or sought to;
I could not,

Because you saturated sight,
And I had no more eyes
For sordid excellence
As Paradise.

And were you lost, I would be,
Though my name
Rang loudest
On the heavenly fame.

And were you saved,
And I condemned to be
Where you were not,
That self were hell to me.

So we must keep apart,
You there, I here,
With just the door ajar
That oceans are,
And prayer,
And that pale sustenance,
Despair!





XIII.

RENUNCIATION.

There came a day at summer's full
Entirely for me;
I thought that such were for the saints,
Where revelations be.

The sun, as common, went abroad,
The flowers, accustomed, blew,
As if no soul the solstice passed
That maketh all things new.

The time was scarce profaned by speech;
The symbol of a word
Was needless, as at sacrament
The wardrobe of our Lord.

Each was to each the sealed church,
Permitted to commune this time,
Lest we too awkward show
At supper of the Lamb.

The hours slid fast, as hours will,
Clutched tight by greedy hands;
So faces on two decks look back,
Bound to opposing lands.

And so, when all the time had failed,
Without external sound,
Each bound the other's crucifix,
We gave no other bond.

Sufficient troth that we shall rise --
Deposed, at length, the grave --
To that new marriage, justified
Through Calvaries of Love!





XIV.

LOVE'S BAPTISM.

I'm ceded, I've stopped being theirs;
The name they dropped upon my face
With water, in the country church,
Is finished using now,
And they can put it with my dolls,
My childhood, and the string of spools
I've finished threading too.

Baptized before without the choice,
But this time consciously, of grace
Unto supremest name,
Called to my full, the crescent dropped,
Existence's whole arc filled up
With one small diadem.

My second rank, too small the first,
Crowned, crowing on my father's breast,
A half unconscious queen;
But this time, adequate, erect,
With will to choose or to reject.
And I choose -- just a throne.





XV.

RESURRECTION.

'T was a long parting, but the time
For interview had come;
Before the judgment-seat of God,
The last and second time

These fleshless lovers met,
A heaven in a gaze,
A heaven of heavens, the privilege
Of one another's eyes.

No lifetime set on them,
Apparelled as the new
Unborn, except they had beheld,
Born everlasting now.

Was bridal e'er like this?
A paradise, the host,
And cherubim and seraphim
The most familiar guest.





XVI.

APOCALYPSE.

I'm wife; I've finished that,
That other state;
I'm Czar, I'm woman now:
It's safer so.

How odd the girl's life looks
Behind this soft eclipse!
I think that earth seems so
To those in heaven now.

This being comfort, then
That other kind was pain;
But why compare?
I'm wife! stop there!





XVII.

THE WIFE.

She rose to his requirement, dropped
The playthings of her life
To take the honorable work
Of woman and of wife.

If aught she missed in her new day
Of amplitude, or awe,
Or first prospective, or the gold
In using wore away,

It lay unmentioned, as the sea
Develops pearl and weed,
But only to himself is known
The fathoms they abide.





XVIII.

APOTHEOSIS.

Come slowly, Eden!
Lips unused to thee,
Bashful, sip thy jasmines,
As the fainting bee,

Reaching late his flower,
Round her chamber hums,
Counts his nectars -- enters,
And is lost in balms!











III. NATURE.

I.

New feet within my garden go,
New fingers stir the sod;
A troubadour upon the elm
Betrays the solitude.

New children play upon the green,
New weary sleep below;
And still the pensive spring returns,
And still the punctual snow!





II.

MAY-FLOWER.

Pink, small, and punctual,
Aromatic, low,
Covert in April,
Candid in May,

Dear to the moss,
Known by the knoll,
Next to the robin
In every human soul.

Bold little beauty,
Bedecked with thee,
Nature forswears
Antiquity.





III.

WHY?

The murmur of a bee
A witchcraft yieldeth me.
If any ask me why,
'T were easier to die
Than tell.

The red upon the hill
Taketh away my will;
If anybody sneer,
Take care, for God is here,
That's all.

The breaking of the day
Addeth to my degree;
If any ask me how,
Artist, who drew me so,
Must tell!





IV.

Perhaps you'd like to buy a flower?
But I could never sell.
If you would like to borrow
Until the daffodil

Unties her yellow bonnet
Beneath the village door,
Until the bees, from clover rows
Their hock and sherry draw,

Why, I will lend until just then,
But not an hour more!





V.

The pedigree of honey
Does not concern the bee;
A clover, any time, to him
Is aristocracy.





VI.

A SERVICE OF SONG.

Some keep the Sabbath going to church;
I keep it staying at home,
With a bobolink for a chorister,
And an orchard for a dome.

Some keep the Sabbath in surplice;
I just wear my wings,
And instead of tolling the bell for church,
Our little sexton sings.

God preaches, -- a noted clergyman, --
And the sermon is never long;
So instead of getting to heaven at last,
I'm going all along!





VII.

The bee is not afraid of me,
I know the butterfly;
The pretty people in the woods
Receive me cordially.

The brooks laugh louder when I come,
The breezes madder play.
Wherefore, mine eyes, thy silver mists?
Wherefore, O summer's day?





VIII.

SUMMER'S ARMIES.

Some rainbow coming from the fair!
Some vision of the world Cashmere
I confidently see!
Or else a peacock's purple train,
Feather by feather, on the plain
Fritters itself away!

The dreamy butterflies bestir,
Lethargic pools resume the whir
Of last year's sundered tune.
From some old fortress on the sun
Baronial bees march, one by one,
In murmuring platoon!

The robins stand as thick to-day
As flakes of snow stood yesterday,
On fence and roof and twig.
The orchis binds her feather on
For her old lover, Don the Sun,
Revisiting the bog!

Without commander, countless, still,
The regiment of wood and hill
In bright detachment stand.
Behold! Whose multitudes are these?
The children of whose turbaned seas,
Or what Circassian land?





IX.

THE GRASS.

The grass so little has to do, --
A sphere of simple green,
With only butterflies to brood,
And bees to entertain,

And stir all day to pretty tunes
The breezes fetch along,
And hold the sunshine in its lap
And bow to everything;

And thread the dews all night, like pearls,
And make itself so fine, --
A duchess were too common
For such a noticing.

And even when it dies, to pass
In odors so divine,
As lowly spices gone to sleep,
Or amulets of pine.

And then to dwell in sovereign barns,
And dream the days away, --
The grass so little has to do,
I wish I were the hay!





X.

A little road not made of man,
Enabled of the eye,
Accessible to thill of bee,
Or cart of butterfly.

If town it have, beyond itself,
'T is that I cannot say;
I only sigh, -- no vehicle
Bears me along that way.





XI.

SUMMER SHOWER.

A drop fell on the apple tree,
Another on the roof;
A half a dozen kissed the eaves,
And made the gables laugh.

A few went out to help the brook,
That went to help the sea.
Myself conjectured, Were they pearls,
What necklaces could be!

The dust replaced in hoisted roads,
The birds jocoser sung;
The sunshine threw his hat away,
The orchards spangles hung.

The breezes brought dejected lutes,
And bathed them in the glee;
The East put out a single flag,
And signed the fete away.





XII.

PSALM OF THE DAY.

A something in a summer's day,
As slow her flambeaux burn away,
Which solemnizes me.

A something in a summer's noon, --
An azure depth, a wordless tune,
Transcending ecstasy.

And still within a summer's night
A something so transporting bright,
I clap my hands to see;

Then veil my too inspecting face,
Lest such a subtle, shimmering grace
Flutter too far for me.

The wizard-fingers never rest,
The purple brook within the breast
Still chafes its narrow bed;

Still rears the East her amber flag,
Guides still the sun along the crag
His caravan of red,

Like flowers that heard the tale of dews,
But never deemed the dripping prize
Awaited their low brows;

Or bees, that thought the summer's name
Some rumor of delirium
No summer could for them;

Or Arctic creature, dimly stirred
By tropic hint, -- some travelled bird
Imported to the wood;

Or wind's bright signal to the ear,
Making that homely and severe,
Contented, known, before

The heaven unexpected came,
To lives that thought their worshipping
A too presumptuous psalm.





XIII.

THE SEA OF SUNSET.

This is the land the sunset washes,
These are the banks of the Yellow Sea;
Where it rose, or whither it rushes,
These are the western mystery!

Night after night her purple traffic
Strews the landing with opal bales;
Merchantmen poise upon horizons,
Dip, and vanish with fairy sails.





XIV.

PURPLE CLOVER.

There is a flower that bees prefer,
And butterflies desire;
To gain the purple democrat
The humming-birds aspire.

And whatsoever insect pass,
A honey bears away
Proportioned to his several dearth
And her capacity.

Her face is rounder than the moon,
And ruddier than the gown
Of orchis in the pasture,
Or rhododendron worn.

She doth not wait for June;
Before the world is green
Her sturdy little countenance
Against the wind is seen,

Contending with the grass,
Near kinsman to herself,
For privilege of sod and sun,
Sweet litigants for life.

And when the hills are full,
And newer fashions blow,
Doth not retract a single spice
For pang of jealousy.

Her public is the noon,
Her providence the sun,
Her progress by the bee proclaimed
In sovereign, swerveless tune.

The bravest of the host,
Surrendering the last,
Nor even of defeat aware
When cancelled by the frost.





XV.

THE BEE.

Like trains of cars on tracks of plush
I hear the level bee:
A jar across the flowers goes,
Their velvet masonry

Withstands until the sweet assault
Their chivalry consumes,
While he, victorious, tilts away
To vanquish other blooms.

His feet are shod with gauze,
His helmet is of gold;
His breast, a single onyx
With chrysoprase, inlaid.

His labor is a chant,
His idleness a tune;
Oh, for a bee's experience
Of clovers and of noon!





XVI.

Presentiment is that long shadow on the lawn
Indicative that suns go down;
The notice to the startled grass
That darkness is about to pass.





XVII.

As children bid the guest good-night,
And then reluctant turn,
My flowers raise their pretty lips,
Then put their nightgowns on.

As children caper when they wake,
Merry that it is morn,
My flowers from a hundred cribs
Will peep, and prance again.





XVIII.

Angels in the early morning
May be seen the dews among,
Stooping, plucking, smiling, flying:
Do the buds to them belong?

Angels when the sun is hottest
May be seen the sands among,
Stooping, plucking, sighing, flying;
Parched the flowers they bear along.





XIX.

So bashful when I spied her,
So pretty, so ashamed!
So hidden in her leaflets,
Lest anybody find;

So breathless till I passed her,
So helpless when I turned
And bore her, struggling, blushing,
Her simple haunts beyond!

For whom I robbed the dingle,
For whom betrayed the dell,
Many will doubtless ask me,
But I shall never tell!





XX.

TWO WORLDS.

It makes no difference abroad,
The seasons fit the same,
The mornings blossom into noons,
And split their pods of flame.

Wild-flowers kindle in the woods,
The brooks brag all the day;
No blackbird bates his jargoning
For passing Calvary.

Auto-da-fe and judgment
Are nothing to the bee;
His separation from his rose
To him seems misery.





XXI.

THE MOUNTAIN.

The mountain sat upon the plain
In his eternal chair,
His observation omnifold,
His inquest everywhere.

The seasons prayed around his knees,
Like children round a sire:
Grandfather of the days is he,
Of dawn the ancestor.





XXII.

A DAY.

I'll tell you how the sun rose, --
A ribbon at a time.
The steeples swam in amethyst,
The news like squirrels ran.

The hills untied their bonnets,
The bobolinks begun.
Then I said softly to myself,
"That must have been the sun!"

        *  *  *

But how he set, I know not.
There seemed a purple stile
Which little yellow boys and girls
Were climbing all the while

Till when they reached the other side,
A dominie in gray
Put gently up the evening bars,
And led the flock away.





XXIII.

The butterfly's assumption-gown,
In chrysoprase apartments hung,
  This afternoon put on.

How condescending to descend,
And be of buttercups the friend
  In a New England town!





XXIV.

THE WIND.

Of all the sounds despatched abroad,
There's not a charge to me
Like that old measure in the boughs,
That phraseless melody

The wind does, working like a hand
Whose fingers brush the sky,
Then quiver down, with tufts of tune
Permitted gods and me.

When winds go round and round in bands,
And thrum upon the door,
And birds take places overhead,
To bear them orchestra,

I crave him grace, of summer boughs,
If such an outcast be,
He never heard that fleshless chant
Rise solemn in the tree,

As if some caravan of sound
On deserts, in the sky,
Had broken rank,
Then knit, and passed
In seamless company.





XXV.

DEATH AND LIFE.

Apparently with no surprise
To any happy flower,
The frost beheads it at its play
In accidental power.
The blond assassin passes on,
The sun proceeds unmoved
To measure off another day
For an approving God.





XXVI.

'T WAS later when the summer went
Than when the cricket came,
And yet we knew that gentle clock
Meant nought but going home.

'T was sooner when the cricket went
Than when the winter came,
Yet that pathetic pendulum
Keeps esoteric time.





XXVII.

INDIAN SUMMER.

These are the days when birds come back,
A very few, a bird or two,
To take a backward look.

These are the days when skies put on
The old, old sophistries of June, --
A blue and gold mistake.

Oh, fraud that cannot cheat the bee,
Almost thy plausibility
Induces my belief,

Till ranks of seeds their witness bear,
And softly through the altered air
Hurries a timid leaf!

Oh, sacrament of summer days,
Oh, last communion in the haze,
Permit a child to join,

Thy sacred emblems to partake,
Thy consecrated bread to break,
Taste thine immortal wine!





XXVIII.

AUTUMN.

The morns are meeker than they were,
The nuts are getting brown;
The berry's cheek is plumper,
The rose is out of town.

The maple wears a gayer scarf,
The field a scarlet gown.
Lest I should be old-fashioned,
I'll put a trinket on.





XXIX.

BECLOUDED.

The sky is low, the clouds are mean,
A travelling flake of snow
Across a barn or through a rut
Debates if it will go.

A narrow wind complains all day
How some one treated him;
Nature, like us, is sometimes caught
Without her diadem.





XXX.

THE HEMLOCK.

I think the hemlock likes to stand
Upon a marge of snow;
It suits his own austerity,
And satisfies an awe

That men must slake in wilderness,
Or in the desert cloy, --
An instinct for the hoar, the bald,
Lapland's necessity.

The hemlock's nature thrives on cold;
The gnash of northern winds
Is sweetest nutriment to him,
His best Norwegian wines.

To satin races he is nought;
But children on the Don
Beneath his tabernacles play,
And Dnieper wrestlers run.





XXXI.

There's a certain slant of light,
On winter afternoons,
That oppresses, like the weight
Of cathedral tunes.

Heavenly hurt it gives us;
We can find no scar,
But internal difference
Where the meanings are.

None may teach it anything,
'T is the seal, despair, --
An imperial affliction
Sent us of the air.

When it comes, the landscape listens,
Shadows hold their breath;
When it goes, 't is like the distance
On the look of death.






IV. TIME AND ETERNITY.

I.

One dignity delays for all,
One mitred afternoon.
None can avoid this purple,
None evade this crown.

Coach it insures, and footmen,
Chamber and state and throng;
Bells, also, in the village,
As we ride grand along.

What dignified attendants,
What service when we pause!
How loyally at parting
Their hundred hats they raise!

How pomp surpassing ermine,
When simple you and I
Present our meek escutcheon,
And claim the rank to die!





II.

TOO LATE.

Delayed till she had ceased to know,
Delayed till in its vest of snow
   Her loving bosom lay.
An hour behind the fleeting breath,
Later by just an hour than death, --
   Oh, lagging yesterday!

Could she have guessed that it would be;
Could but a crier of the glee
   Have climbed the distant hill;
Had not the bliss so slow a pace, --
Who knows but this surrendered face
   Were undefeated still?

Oh, if there may departing be
Any forgot by victory
   In her imperial round,
Show them this meek apparelled thing,
That could not stop to be a king,
   Doubtful if it be crowned!





III.

ASTRA CASTRA.

Departed to the judgment,
A mighty afternoon;
Great clouds like ushers leaning,
Creation looking on.

The flesh surrendered, cancelled,
The bodiless begun;
Two worlds, like audiences, disperse
And leave the soul alone.





IV.

Safe in their alabaster chambers,
Untouched by morning and untouched by noon,
Sleep the meek members of the resurrection,
Rafter of satin, and roof of stone.

Light laughs the breeze in her castle of sunshine;
Babbles the bee in a stolid ear;
Pipe the sweet birds in ignorant cadence, --
Ah, what sagacity perished here!

Grand go the years in the crescent above them;
Worlds scoop their arcs, and firmaments row,
Diadems drop and Doges surrender,
Soundless as dots on a disk of snow.





V.

On this long storm the rainbow rose,
On this late morn the sun;
The clouds, like listless elephants,
Horizons straggled down.

The birds rose smiling in their nests,
The gales indeed were done;
Alas! how heedless were the eyes
On whom the summer shone!

The quiet nonchalance of death
No daybreak can bestir;
The slow archangel's syllables
Must awaken her.





VI.

FROM THE CHRYSALIS.

My cocoon tightens, colors tease,
I'm feeling for the air;
A dim capacity for wings
Degrades the dress I wear.

A power of butterfly must be
The aptitude to fly,
Meadows of majesty concedes
And easy sweeps of sky.

So I must baffle at the hint
And cipher at the sign,
And make much blunder, if at last
I take the clew divine.





VII.

SETTING SAIL.

Exultation is the going
Of an inland soul to sea, --
Past the houses, past the headlands,
Into deep eternity!

Bred as we, among the mountains,
Can the sailor understand
The divine intoxication
Of the first league out from land?





VIII.

Look back on time with kindly eyes,
He doubtless did his best;
How softly sinks his trembling sun
In human nature's west!





IX.

A train went through a burial gate,
A bird broke forth and sang,
And trilled, and quivered, and shook his throat
Till all the churchyard rang;

And then adjusted his little notes,
And bowed and sang again.
Doubtless, he thought it meet of him
To say good-by to men.





X.

I died for beauty, but was scarce
Adjusted in the tomb,
When one who died for truth was lain
In an adjoining room.

He questioned softly why I failed?
"For beauty," I replied.
"And I for truth, -- the two are one;
We brethren are," he said.

And so, as kinsmen met a night,
We talked between the rooms,
Until the moss had reached our lips,
And covered up our names.





XI.

"TROUBLED ABOUT MANY THINGS."

How many times these low feet staggered,
Only the soldered mouth can tell;
Try! can you stir the awful rivet?
Try! can you lift the hasps of steel?

Stroke the cool forehead, hot so often,
Lift, if you can, the listless hair;
Handle the adamantine fingers
Never a thimble more shall wear.

Buzz the dull flies on the chamber window;
Brave shines the sun through the freckled pane;
Fearless the cobweb swings from the ceiling --
Indolent housewife, in daisies lain!





XII.

REAL.

I like a look of agony,
Because I know it 's true;
Men do not sham convulsion,
Nor simulate a throe.

The eyes glaze once, and that is death.
Impossible to feign
The beads upon the forehead
By homely anguish strung.





XIII.

THE FUNERAL.

That short, potential stir
That each can make but once,
That bustle so illustrious
'T is almost consequence,

Is the eclat of death.
Oh, thou unknown renown
That not a beggar would accept,
Had he the power to spurn!





XIV.

I went to thank her,
But she slept;
Her bed a funnelled stone,
With nosegays at the head and foot,
That travellers had thrown,

Who went to thank her;
But she slept.
'T was short to cross the sea
To look upon her like, alive,
But turning back 't was slow.





XV.

I've seen a dying eye
Run round and round a room
In search of something, as it seemed,
Then cloudier become;
And then, obscure with fog,
And then be soldered down,
Without disclosing what it be,
'T were blessed to have seen.





XVI.

REFUGE.

The clouds their backs together laid,
The north begun to push,
The forests galloped till they fell,
The lightning skipped like mice;
The thunder crumbled like a stuff --
How good to be safe in tombs,
Where nature's temper cannot reach,
Nor vengeance ever comes!





XVII.

I never saw a moor,
I never saw the sea;
Yet know I how the heather looks,
And what a wave must be.

I never spoke with God,
Nor visited in heaven;
Yet certain am I of the spot
As if the chart were given.





XVIII.

PLAYMATES.

God permits industrious angels
Afternoons to play.
I met one, -- forgot my school-mates,
All, for him, straightway.

God calls home the angels promptly
At the setting sun;
I missed mine. How dreary marbles,
After playing Crown!





XIX.

To know just how he suffered would be dear;
To know if any human eyes were near
To whom he could intrust his wavering gaze,
Until it settled firm on Paradise.

To know if he was patient, part content,
Was dying as he thought, or different;
Was it a pleasant day to die,
And did the sunshine face his way?

What was his furthest mind, of home, or God,
Or what the distant say
At news that he ceased human nature
On such a day?

And wishes, had he any?
Just his sigh, accented,
Had been legible to me.
And was he confident until
Ill fluttered out in everlasting well?

And if he spoke, what name was best,
What first,
What one broke off with
At the drowsiest?

Was he afraid, or tranquil?
Might he know
How conscious consciousness could grow,
Till love that was, and love too blest to be,
Meet -- and the junction be Eternity?





XX.

The last night that she lived,
It was a common night,
Except the dying; this to us
Made nature different.

We noticed smallest things, --
Things overlooked before,
By this great light upon our minds
Italicized, as 't were.

That others could exist
While she must finish quite,
A jealousy for her arose
So nearly infinite.

We waited while she passed;
It was a narrow time,
Too jostled were our souls to speak,
At length the notice came.

She mentioned, and forgot;
Then lightly as a reed
Bent to the water, shivered scarce,
Consented, and was dead.

And we, we placed the hair,
And drew the head erect;
And then an awful leisure was,
Our faith to regulate.





XXI.

THE FIRST LESSON.

Not in this world to see his face
Sounds long, until I read the place
Where this is said to be
But just the primer to a life
Unopened, rare, upon the shelf,
Clasped yet to him and me.

And yet, my primer suits me so
I would not choose a book to know
Than that, be sweeter wise;
Might some one else so learned be,
And leave me just my A B C,
Himself could have the skies.





XXII.

The bustle in a house
The morning after death
Is solemnest of industries
Enacted upon earth, --

The sweeping up the heart,
And putting love away
We shall not want to use again
Until eternity.





XXIII.

I reason, earth is short,
And anguish absolute,
And many hurt;
But what of that?

I reason, we could die:
The best vitality
Cannot excel decay;
But what of that?

I reason that in heaven
Somehow, it will be even,
Some new equation given;
But what of that?





XXIV.

Afraid? Of whom am I afraid?
Not death; for who is he?
The porter of my father's lodge
As much abasheth me.

Of life? 'T were odd I fear a thing
That comprehendeth me
In one or more existences
At Deity's decree.

Of resurrection? Is the east
Afraid to trust the morn
With her fastidious forehead?
As soon impeach my crown!





XXV.

DYING.

The sun kept setting, setting still;
No hue of afternoon
Upon the village I perceived, --
From house to house 't was noon.

The dusk kept dropping, dropping still;
No dew upon the grass,
But only on my forehead stopped,
And wandered in my face.

My feet kept drowsing, drowsing still,
My fingers were awake;
Yet why so little sound myself
Unto my seeming make?

How well I knew the light before!
I could not see it now.
'T is dying, I am doing; but
I'm not afraid to know.





XXVI.

Two swimmers wrestled on the spar
Until the morning sun,
When one turned smiling to the land.
O God, the other one!

The stray ships passing spied a face
Upon the waters borne,
With eyes in death still begging raised,
And hands beseeching thrown.





XXVII.

THE CHARIOT.

Because I could not stop for Death,
He kindly stopped for me;
The carriage held but just ourselves
And Immortality.

We slowly drove, he knew no haste,
And I had put away
My labor, and my leisure too,
For his civility.

We passed the school where children played,
Their lessons scarcely done;
We passed the fields of gazing grain,
We passed the setting sun.

We paused before a house that seemed
A swelling of the ground;
The roof was scarcely visible,
The cornice but a mound.

Since then 't is centuries; but each
Feels shorter than the day
I first surmised the horses' heads
Were toward eternity.





XXVIII.

She went as quiet as the dew
From a familiar flower.
Not like the dew did she return
At the accustomed hour!

She dropt as softly as a star
From out my summer's eve;
Less skilful than Leverrier
It's sorer to believe!





XXIX.

RESURGAM.

At last to be identified!
At last, the lamps upon thy side,
The rest of life to see!
Past midnight, past the morning star!
Past sunrise! Ah! what leagues there are
Between our feet and day!





XXX.

Except to heaven, she is nought;
Except for angels, lone;
Except to some wide-wandering bee,
A flower superfluous blown;

Except for winds, provincial;
Except by butterflies,
Unnoticed as a single dew
That on the acre lies.

The smallest housewife in the grass,
Yet take her from the lawn,
And somebody has lost the face
That made existence home!





XXXI.

Death is a dialogue between
The spirit and the dust.
"Dissolve," says Death. The Spirit, "Sir,
I have another trust."

Death doubts it, argues from the ground.
The Spirit turns away,
Just laying off, for evidence,
An overcoat of clay.





XXXII.

It was too late for man,
But early yet for God;
Creation impotent to help,
But prayer remained our side.

How excellent the heaven,
When earth cannot be had;
How hospitable, then, the face
Of our old neighbor, God!





XXXIII.

ALONG THE POTOMAC.

When I was small, a woman died.
To-day her only boy
Went up from the Potomac,
His face all victory,

To look at her; how slowly
The seasons must have turned
Till bullets clipt an angle,
And he passed quickly round!

If pride shall be in Paradise
I never can decide;
Of their imperial conduct,
No person testified.

But proud in apparition,
That woman and her boy
Pass back and forth before my brain,
As ever in the sky.





XXXIV.

The daisy follows soft the sun,
And when his golden walk is done,
   Sits shyly at his feet.
He, waking, finds the flower near.
"Wherefore, marauder, art thou here?"
   "Because, sir, love is sweet!"

We are the flower, Thou the sun!
Forgive us, if as days decline,
   We nearer steal to Thee, --
Enamoured of the parting west,
The peace, the flight, the amethyst,
   Night's possibility!





XXXV.

EMANCIPATION.

No rack can torture me,
My soul's at liberty
Behind this mortal bone
There knits a bolder one

You cannot prick with saw,
Nor rend with scymitar.
Two bodies therefore be;
Bind one, and one will flee.

The eagle of his nest
No easier divest
And gain the sky,
Than mayest thou,

Except thyself may be
Thine enemy;
Captivity is consciousness,
So's liberty.





XXXVI.

LOST.

I lost a world the other day.
Has anybody found?
You'll know it by the row of stars
Around its forehead bound.

A rich man might not notice it;
Yet to my frugal eye
Of more esteem than ducats.
Oh, find it, sir, for me!





XXXVII.

If I shouldn't be alive
When the robins come,
Give the one in red cravat
A memorial crumb.

If I couldn't thank you,
Being just asleep,
You will know I'm trying
With my granite lip!





XXXVIII.

Sleep is supposed to be,
By souls of sanity,
The shutting of the eye.

Sleep is the station grand
Down which on either hand
The hosts of witness stand!

Morn is supposed to be,
By people of degree,
The breaking of the day.

Morning has not occurred!
That shall aurora be
East of eternity;

One with the banner gay,
One in the red array, --
That is the break of day.





XXXIX.

I shall know why, when time is over,
And I have ceased to wonder why;
Christ will explain each separate anguish
In the fair schoolroom of the sky.

He will tell me what Peter promised,
And I, for wonder at his woe,
I shall forget the drop of anguish
That scalds me now, that scalds me now.





XL.

I never lost as much but twice,
And that was in the sod;
Twice have I stood a beggar
Before the door of God!

Angels, twice descending,
Reimbursed my store.
Burglar, banker, father,
I am poor once more!






POEMS

by EMILY DICKINSON

Second Series




Edited by two of her friends

MABEL LOOMIS TODD and T.W. HIGGINSON




PREFACE

The eagerness with which the first volume of Emily Dickinson's
poems has been read shows very clearly that all our alleged modern
artificiality does not prevent a prompt appreciation of the
qualities of directness and simplicity in approaching the greatest
themes,--life and love and death. That "irresistible needle-touch,"
as one of her best critics has called it, piercing at once the very
core of a thought, has found a response as wide and sympathetic as
it has been unexpected even to those who knew best her compelling
power.  This second volume, while open to the same criticism as to
form with its predecessor, shows also the same shining beauties.

Although Emily Dickinson had been in the habit of sending
occasional poems to friends and correspondents, the full extent of
her writing was by no means imagined by them. Her friend "H.H."
must at least have suspected it, for in a letter dated 5th
September, 1884, she wrote:--


MY DEAR FRIEND,-- What portfolios full of verses
you must have! It is a cruel wrong to your "day and
generation" that you will not give them light.

If such a thing should happen as that I should outlive
you, I wish you would make me your literary legatee
and executor. Surely after you are what is called
"dead" you will be willing that the poor ghosts you
have left behind should be cheered and pleased by your
verses, will you not? You ought to be. I do not think
we have a right to withhold from the world a word or
a thought any more than a deed which might help a
single soul. . . .

                Truly yours,

                        HELEN JACKSON.


The "portfolios" were found, shortly after Emily Dickinson's death,
by her sister and only surviving housemate. Most of the poems had
been carefully copied on sheets of note-paper, and tied in little
fascicules, each of six or eight sheets. While many of them bear
evidence of having been thrown off at white heat, still more had
received thoughtful revision. There is the frequent addition of
rather perplexing foot-notes, affording large choice of words and
phrases. And in the copies which she sent to friends, sometimes one
form, sometimes another, is found to have been used. Without
important exception, her friends have generously placed at the
disposal of the Editors any poems they had received from her; and
these have given the obvious advantage of comparison among several
renderings of the same verse.

To what further rigorous pruning her verses would have been
subjected had she published them herself, we cannot know. They
should be regarded in many cases as merely the first strong and
suggestive sketches of an artist, intended to be embodied at some
time in the finished picture.

Emily Dickinson appears to have written her first poems in the
winter of 1862. In a letter to oone of the present Editors the
April following, she says, "I made no verse, but one or two, until
this winter."

The handwriting was at first somewhat like the delicate, running
Italian hand of our elder gentlewomen; but as she advanced in
breadth of thought, it grew bolder and more abrupt, until in her
latest years each letter stood distinct and separate from its
fellows. In most of her poems, particularly the later ones,
everything by way of punctuation was discarded, except numerous
dashes; and all important words began with capitals. The effect of
a page of her more recent manuscript is exceedingly quaint and
strong.  The fac-simile given in the present volume is from one of
the earlier transition periods. Although there is nowhere a date,
the handwriting makes it possible to arrange the poems with general
chronologic accuracy.

As a rule, the verses were without titles; but "A Country Burial,"
"A Thunder-Storm," "The Humming-Bird," and a few others were named
by their author, frequently at the end,--sometimes only in the
accompanying note, if sent to a friend.

The variation of readings, with the fact that she often wrote in
pencil and not always clearly, have at times thrown a good deal of
responsibility upon her Editors. But all interference not
absolutely inevitable has been avoided. The very roughness of her
rendering is part of herself, and not lightly to be touched; for it
seems in many cases that she intentionally avoided the smoother and
more usual rhymes.

Like impressionist pictures, or Wagner's rugged music, the very
absence of conventional form challenges attention. In Emily
Dickinson's exacting hands, the especial, intrinsic fitness of a
particular order of words might not be sacrificed to anything
virtually extrinsic; and her verses all show a strange cadence of
inner rhythmical music. Lines are always daringly constructed, and
the "thought-rhyme" appears frequently,--appealing, indeed, to an
unrecognized sense more elusive than hearing.

Emily Dickinson scrutinized everything with clear-eyed frankness.
Every subject was proper ground for legitimate study, even the
sombre facts of death and burial, and the unknown life beyond. She
touches these themes sometimes lightly, sometimes almost
humorously, more often with weird and peculiar power; but she is
never by any chance frivolous or trivial. And while, as one critic
has said, she may exhibit toward God "an Emersonian self-possession,"
it was because she looked upon all life with a candor as unprejudiced
as it is rare.

She had tried society and the world, and found them lacking.  She
was not an invalid, and she lived in seclusion from no
love-disappointment. Her life was the normal blossoming of a nature
introspective to a high degree, whose best thought could not exist
in pretence.

Storm, wind, the wild March sky, sunsets and dawns; the birds and
bees, butterflies and flowers of her garden, with a few trusted
human friends, were sufficient companionship. The coming of the
first robin was a jubilee beyond crowning of monarch or birthday of
pope; the first red leaf hurrying through "the altered air," an
epoch. Immortality was close about her; and while never morbid or
melancholy, she lived in its presence.

                                MABEL LOOMIS TODD.

        AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTS,
            August, I891.











    My nosegays are for captives;
       Dim, long-expectant eyes,
    Fingers denied the plucking,
       Patient till paradise,

    To such, if they should whisper
       Of morning and the moor,
    They bear no other errand,
       And I, no other prayer.




I. LIFE.


I.

I'm nobody!  Who are you?
Are you nobody, too?
Then there 's a pair of us -- don't tell!
They 'd banish us, you know.

How dreary to be somebody!
How public, like a frog
To tell your name the livelong day
To an admiring bog!





II.

I bring an unaccustomed wine
To lips long parching, next to mine,
And summon them to drink.

Crackling with fever, they essay;
I turn my brimming eyes away,
And come next hour to look.

The hands still hug the tardy glass;
The lips I would have cooled, alas!
Are so superfluous cold,

I would as soon attempt to warm
The bosoms where the frost has lain
Ages beneath the mould.

Some other thirsty there may be
To whom this would have pointed me
Had it remained to speak.

And so I always bear the cup
If, haply, mine may be the drop
Some pilgrim thirst to slake, --

If, haply, any say to me,
"Unto the little, unto me,"
When I at last awake.





III.

The nearest dream recedes, unrealized.
      The heaven we chase
      Like the June bee
      Before the school-boy
      Invites the race;
      Stoops to an easy clover --
Dips -- evades -- teases -- deploys;
      Then to the royal clouds
      Lifts his light pinnace
      Heedless of the boy
Staring, bewildered, at the mocking sky.

      Homesick for steadfast honey,
      Ah! the bee flies not
That brews that rare variety.





IV.

We play at paste,
Till qualified for pearl,
Then drop the paste,
And deem ourself a fool.
The shapes, though, were similar,
And our new hands
Learned gem-tactics
Practising sands.





V.

I found the phrase to every thought
I ever had, but one;
And that defies me, -- as a hand
Did try to chalk the sun

To races nurtured in the dark; --
How would your own begin?
Can blaze be done in cochineal,
Or noon in mazarin?





VI.

HOPE.

Hope is the thing with feathers
That perches in the soul,
And sings the tune without the words,
And never stops at all,

And sweetest in the gale is heard;
And sore must be the storm
That could abash the little bird
That kept so many warm.

I 've heard it in the chillest land,
And on the strangest sea;
Yet, never, in extremity,
It asked a crumb of me.





VII.

THE WHITE HEAT.

Dare you see a soul at the white heat?
   Then crouch within the door.
Red is the fire's common tint;
   But when the vivid ore

Has sated flame's conditions,
   Its quivering substance plays
Without a color but the light
   Of unanointed blaze.

Least village boasts its blacksmith,
   Whose anvil's even din
Stands symbol for the finer forge
   That soundless tugs within,

Refining these impatient ores
   With hammer and with blaze,
Until the designated light
   Repudiate the forge.





VIII.

TRIUMPHANT.

Who never lost, are unprepared
A coronet to find;
Who never thirsted, flagons
And cooling tamarind.

Who never climbed the weary league --
Can such a foot explore
The purple territories
On Pizarro's shore?

How many legions overcome?
The emperor will say.
How many colors taken
On Revolution Day?

How many bullets bearest?
The royal scar hast thou?
Angels, write "Promoted"
On this soldier's brow!





IX.

THE TEST.

I can wade grief,
Whole pools of it, --
I 'm used to that.
But the least push of joy
Breaks up my feet,
And I tip -- drunken.
Let no pebble smile,
'T was the new liquor, --
That was all!

Power is only pain,
Stranded, through discipline,
Till weights will hang.
Give balm to giants,
And they 'll wilt, like men.
Give Himmaleh, --
They 'll carry him!





X.

ESCAPE.

I never hear the word "escape"
Without a quicker blood,
A sudden expectation,
A flying attitude.

I never hear of prisons broad
By soldiers battered down,
But I tug childish at my bars, --
Only to fail again!






XI.

COMPENSATION.

For each ecstatic instant
We must an anguish pay
In keen and quivering ratio
To the ecstasy.

For each beloved hour
Sharp pittances of years,
Bitter contested farthings
And coffers heaped with tears.





XII.

THE MARTYRS.

Through the straight pass of suffering
The martyrs even trod,
Their feet upon temptation,
Their faces upon God.

A stately, shriven company;
Convulsion playing round,
Harmless as streaks of meteor
Upon a planet's bound.

Their faith the everlasting troth;
Their expectation fair;
The needle to the north degree
Wades so, through polar air.





XIII.

A PRAYER.

I meant to have but modest needs,
Such as content, and heaven;
Within my income these could lie,
And life and I keep even.

But since the last included both,
It would suffice my prayer
But just for one to stipulate,
And grace would grant the pair.

And so, upon this wise I prayed, --
Great Spirit, give to me
A heaven not so large as yours,
But large enough for me.

A smile suffused Jehovah's face;
The cherubim withdrew;
Grave saints stole out to look at me,
And showed their dimples, too.

I left the place with all my might, --
My prayer away I threw;
The quiet ages picked it up,
And Judgment twinkled, too,

That one so honest be extant
As take the tale for true
That "Whatsoever you shall ask,
Itself be given you."

But I, grown shrewder, scan the skies
With a suspicious air, --
As children, swindled for the first,
All swindlers be, infer.





XIV.

The thought beneath so slight a film
Is more distinctly seen, --
As laces just reveal the surge,
Or mists the Apennine.





XV.

The soul unto itself
Is an imperial friend, --
Or the most agonizing spy
An enemy could send.

Secure against its own,
No treason it can fear;
Itself its sovereign, of itself
The soul should stand in awe.





XVI.

Surgeons must be very careful
When they take the knife!
Underneath their fine incisions
Stirs the culprit, -- Life!





XVII.

THE RAILWAY TRAIN.

I like to see it lap the miles,
And lick the valleys up,
And stop to feed itself at tanks;
And then, prodigious, step

Around a pile of mountains,
And, supercilious, peer
In shanties by the sides of roads;
And then a quarry pare

To fit its sides, and crawl between,
Complaining all the while
In horrid, hooting stanza;
Then chase itself down hill

And neigh like Boanerges;
Then, punctual as a star,
Stop -- docile and omnipotent --
At its own stable door.





XVIII.

THE SHOW.

The show is not the show,
But they that go.
Menagerie to me
My neighbor be.
Fair play --
Both went to see.





XIX.

Delight becomes pictorial
When viewed through pain, --
More fair, because impossible
That any gain.

The mountain at a given distance
In amber lies;
Approached, the amber flits a little, --
And that 's the skies!





XX.

A thought went up my mind to-day
That I have had before,
But did not finish, -- some way back,
I could not fix the year,

Nor where it went, nor why it came
The second time to me,
Nor definitely what it was,
Have I the art to say.

But somewhere in my soul, I know
I 've met the thing before;
It just reminded me -- 't was all --
And came my way no more.





XXI.

Is Heaven a physician?
They say that He can heal,
But medicine posthumous
   Is unavailable.

Is Heaven an exchequer?
   They speak of what we owe;
But that negotiation
   I 'm not a party to.





XXII.

THE RETURN.

Though I get home how late, how late!
So I get home, 't will compensate.
Better will be the ecstasy
That they have done expecting me,
When, night descending, dumb and dark,
They hear my unexpected knock.
Transporting must the moment be,
Brewed from decades of agony!

To think just how the fire will burn,
Just how long-cheated eyes will turn
To wonder what myself will say,
And what itself will say to me,
Beguiles the centuries of way!





XXIII.

A poor torn heart, a tattered heart,
That sat it down to rest,
Nor noticed that the ebbing day
Flowed silver to the west,
Nor noticed night did soft descend
Nor constellation burn,
Intent upon the vision
Of latitudes unknown.

The angels, happening that way,
This dusty heart espied;
Tenderly took it up from toil
And carried it to God.
There, -- sandals for the barefoot;
There, -- gathered from the gales,
Do the blue havens by the hand
Lead the wandering sails.





XXIV.

TOO MUCH.

I should have been too glad, I see,
Too lifted for the scant degree
   Of life's penurious round;
My little circuit would have shamed
This new circumference, have blamed
   The homelier time behind.

I should have been too saved, I see,
Too rescued; fear too dim to me
   That I could spell the prayer
I knew so perfect yesterday, --
That scalding one, "Sabachthani,"
   Recited fluent here.

Earth would have been too much, I see,
And heaven not enough for me;
   I should have had the joy
Without the fear to justify, --
The palm without the Calvary;
   So, Saviour, crucify.

Defeat whets victory, they say;
The reefs in old Gethsemane
   Endear the shore beyond.
'T is beggars banquets best define;
'T is thirsting vitalizes wine, --
   Faith faints to understand.





XXV.

SHIPWRECK.

It tossed and tossed, --
A little brig I knew, --
O'ertook by blast,
It spun and spun,
And groped delirious, for morn.

It slipped and slipped,
As one that drunken stepped;
Its white foot tripped,
Then dropped from sight.

Ah, brig, good-night
To crew and you;
The ocean's heart too smooth, too blue,
To break for you.





XXVI.

Victory comes late,
And is held low to freezing lips
Too rapt with frost
To take it.
How sweet it would have tasted,
Just a drop!
Was God so economical?
His table 's spread too high for us
Unless we dine on tip-toe.
Crumbs fit such little mouths,
Cherries suit robins;
The eagle's golden breakfast
Strangles them.
God keeps his oath to sparrows,
Who of little love
Know how to starve!





XXVII.

ENOUGH.

God gave a loaf to every bird,
But just a crumb to me;
I dare not eat it, though I starve, --
My poignant luxury
To own it, touch it, prove the feat
That made the pellet mine, --
Too happy in my sparrow chance
For ampler coveting.

It might be famine all around,
I could not miss an ear,
Such plenty smiles upon my board,
My garner shows so fair.
I wonder how the rich may feel, --
An Indiaman -- an Earl?
I deem that I with but a crumb
Am sovereign of them all.





XXVIII.

Experiment to me
Is every one I meet.
If it contain a kernel?
The figure of a nut

Presents upon a tree,
Equally plausibly;
But meat within is requisite,
To squirrels and to me.





XXIX.

MY COUNTRY'S WARDROBE.

My country need not change her gown,
Her triple suit as sweet
As when 't was cut at Lexington,
And first pronounced "a fit."

Great Britain disapproves "the stars;"
Disparagement discreet, --
There 's something in their attitude
That taunts her bayonet.





XXX.

Faith is a fine invention
For gentlemen who see;
But microscopes are prudent
In an emergency!





XXXI.

Except the heaven had come so near,
So seemed to choose my door,
The distance would not haunt me so;
I had not hoped before.

But just to hear the grace depart
I never thought to see,
Afflicts me with a double loss;
'T is lost, and lost to me.





XXXII.

Portraits are to daily faces
As an evening west
To a fine, pedantic sunshine
In a satin vest.





XXXIII.

THE DUEL.

I took my power in my hand.
And went against the world;
'T was not so much as David had,
But I was twice as bold.

I aimed my pebble, but myself
Was all the one that fell.
Was it Goliath was too large,
Or only I too small?





XXXIV.

A shady friend for torrid days
Is easier to find
Than one of higher temperature
For frigid hour of mind.

The vane a little to the east
Scares muslin souls away;
If broadcloth breasts are firmer
Than those of organdy,

Who is to blame? The weaver?
Ah! the bewildering thread!
The tapestries of paradise
So notelessly are made!





XXXV.

THE GOAL.

Each life converges to some centre
Expressed or still;
Exists in every human nature
A goal,

Admitted scarcely to itself, it may be,
Too fair
For credibility's temerity
To dare.

Adored with caution, as a brittle heaven,
To reach
Were hopeless as the rainbow's raiment
To touch,

Yet persevered toward, surer for the distance;
How high
Unto the saints' slow diligence
The sky!

Ungained, it may be, by a life's low venture,
But then,
Eternity enables the endeavoring
Again.





XXXVI.

SIGHT.

Before I got my eye put out,
I liked as well to see
As other creatures that have eyes,
And know no other way.

But were it told to me, to-day,
That I might have the sky
For mine, I tell you that my heart
Would split, for size of me.

The meadows mine, the mountains mine, --
All forests, stintless stars,
As much of noon as I could take
Between my finite eyes.

The motions of the dipping birds,
The lightning's jointed road,
For mine to look at when I liked, --
The news would strike me dead!

So safer, guess, with just my soul
Upon the window-pane
Where other creatures put their eyes,
Incautious of the sun.





XXXVII.

Talk with prudence to a beggar
Of 'Potosi' and the mines!
Reverently to the hungry
Of your viands and your wines!

Cautious, hint to any captive
You have passed enfranchised feet!
Anecdotes of air in dungeons
Have sometimes proved deadly sweet!





XXXVIII.

THE PREACHER.

He preached upon "breadth" till it argued him narrow, --
The broad are too broad to define;
And of "truth" until it proclaimed him a liar, --
The truth never flaunted a sign.

Simplicity fled from his counterfeit presence
As gold the pyrites would shun.
What confusion would cover the innocent Jesus
To meet so enabled a man!





XXXIX.

Good night! which put the candle out?
A jealous zephyr, not a doubt.
   Ah! friend, you little knew
How long at that celestial wick
The angels labored diligent;
   Extinguished, now, for you!

It might have been the lighthouse spark
Some sailor, rowing in the dark,
   Had importuned to see!
It might have been the waning lamp
That lit the drummer from the camp
   To purer reveille!





XL.

When I hoped I feared,
Since I hoped I dared;
Everywhere alone
As a church remain;
Spectre cannot harm,
Serpent cannot charm;
He deposes doom,
Who hath suffered him.





XLI.

DEED.

A deed knocks first at thought,
And then it knocks at will.
That is the manufacturing spot,
And will at home and well.

It then goes out an act,
Or is entombed so still
That only to the ear of God
Its doom is audible.





XLII.

TIME'S LESSON.

Mine enemy is growing old, --
I have at last revenge.
The palate of the hate departs;
If any would avenge, --

Let him be quick, the viand flits,
It is a faded meat.
Anger as soon as fed is dead;
'T is starving makes it fat.





XLIII.

REMORSE.

Remorse is memory awake,
Her companies astir, --
A presence of departed acts
At window and at door.

It's past set down before the soul,
And lighted with a match,
Perusal to facilitate
Of its condensed despatch.

Remorse is cureless, -- the disease
Not even God can heal;
For 't is his institution, --
The complement of hell.





XLIV.

THE SHELTER.

The body grows outside, --
The more convenient way, --
That if the spirit like to hide,
Its temple stands alway

Ajar, secure, inviting;
It never did betray
The soul that asked its shelter
In timid honesty.





XLV.

Undue significance a starving man attaches
To food
Far off; he sighs, and therefore hopeless,
And therefore good.

Partaken, it relieves indeed, but proves us
That spices fly
In the receipt. It was the distance
Was savory.





XLVI.

Heart not so heavy as mine,
Wending late home,
As it passed my window
Whistled itself a tune, --

A careless snatch, a ballad,
A ditty of the street;
Yet to my irritated ear
An anodyne so sweet,

It was as if a bobolink,
Sauntering this way,
Carolled and mused and carolled,
Then bubbled slow away.

It was as if a chirping brook
Upon a toilsome way
Set bleeding feet to minuets
Without the knowing why.

To-morrow, night will come again,
Weary, perhaps, and sore.
Ah, bugle, by my window,
I pray you stroll once more!





XLVII.

I many times thought peace had come,
When peace was far away;
As wrecked men deem they sight the land
At centre of the sea,

And struggle slacker, but to prove,
As hopelessly as I,
How many the fictitious shores
Before the harbor lie.





XLVIII.

Unto my books so good to turn
Far ends of tired days;
It half endears the abstinence,
And pain is missed in praise.

As flavors cheer retarded guests
With banquetings to be,
So spices stimulate the time
Till my small library.

It may be wilderness without,
Far feet of failing men,
But holiday excludes the night,
And it is bells within.

I thank these kinsmen of the shelf;
Their countenances bland
Enamour in prospective,
And satisfy, obtained.





XLIX.

This merit hath the worst, --
It cannot be again.
When Fate hath taunted last
And thrown her furthest stone,

The maimed may pause and breathe,
And glance securely round.
The deer invites no longer
Than it eludes the hound.





L.

HUNGER.

I had been hungry all the years;
My noon had come, to dine;
I, trembling, drew the table near,
And touched the curious wine.

'T was this on tables I had seen,
When turning, hungry, lone,
I looked in windows, for the wealth
I could not hope to own.

I did not know the ample bread,
'T was so unlike the crumb
The birds and I had often shared
In Nature's dining-room.

The plenty hurt me, 't was so new, --
Myself felt ill and odd,
As berry of a mountain bush
Transplanted to the road.

Nor was I hungry; so I found
That hunger was a way
Of persons outside windows,
The entering takes away.





LI.

I gained it so,
      By climbing slow,
By catching at the twigs that grow
Between the bliss and me.
      It hung so high,
      As well the sky
      Attempt by strategy.


I said I gained it, --
      This was all.
Look, how I clutch it,
      Lest it fall,
And I a pauper go;
Unfitted by an instant's grace
For the contented beggar's face
I wore an hour ago.





LII.

To learn the transport by the pain,
As blind men learn the sun;
To die of thirst, suspecting
That brooks in meadows run;

To stay the homesick, homesick feet
Upon a foreign shore
Haunted by native lands, the while,
And blue, beloved air --

This is the sovereign anguish,
This, the signal woe!
These are the patient laureates
Whose voices, trained below,

Ascend in ceaseless carol,
Inaudible, indeed,
To us, the duller scholars
Of the mysterious bard!





LIII.

RETURNING.

I years had been from home,
And now, before the door,
I dared not open, lest a face
I never saw before

Stare vacant into mine
And ask my business there.
My business, -- just a life I left,
Was such still dwelling there?

I fumbled at my nerve,
I scanned the windows near;
The silence like an ocean rolled,
And broke against my ear.

I laughed a wooden laugh
That I could fear a door,
Who danger and the dead had faced,
But never quaked before.

I fitted to the latch
My hand, with trembling care,
Lest back the awful door should spring,
And leave me standing there.

I moved my fingers off
As cautiously as glass,
And held my ears, and like a thief
Fled gasping from the house.





LIV.

PRAYER.

Prayer is the little implement
Through which men reach
Where presence is denied them.
They fling their speech

By means of it in God's ear;
If then He hear,
This sums the apparatus
Comprised in prayer.





LV.

I know that he exists
Somewhere, in silence.
He has hid his rare life
From our gross eyes.

'T is an instant's play,
'T is a fond ambush,
Just to make bliss
Earn her own surprise!

But should the play
Prove piercing earnest,
Should the glee glaze
In death's stiff stare,

Would not the fun
Look too expensive?
Would not the jest
Have crawled too far?





LVI.

MELODIES UNHEARD.

Musicians wrestle everywhere:
All day, among the crowded air,
  I hear the silver strife;
And -- waking long before the dawn --
Such transport breaks upon the town
  I think it that "new life!"

It is not bird, it has no nest;
Nor band, in brass and scarlet dressed,
  Nor tambourine, nor man;
It is not hymn from pulpit read, --
The morning stars the treble led
  On time's first afternoon!

Some say it is the spheres at play!
Some say that bright majority
  Of vanished dames and men!
Some think it service in the place
Where we, with late, celestial face,
  Please God, shall ascertain!





LVII.

CALLED BACK.

Just lost when I was saved!
Just felt the world go by!
Just girt me for the onset with eternity,
When breath blew back,
And on the other side
I heard recede the disappointed tide!

Therefore, as one returned, I feel,
Odd secrets of the line to tell!
Some sailor, skirting foreign shores,
Some pale reporter from the awful doors
Before the seal!

Next time, to stay!
Next time, the things to see
By ear unheard,
Unscrutinized by eye.

Next time, to tarry,
While the ages steal, --
Slow tramp the centuries,
And the cycles wheel.






II. LOVE.


I.

CHOICE.

Of all the souls that stand create
I have elected one.
When sense from spirit files away,
And subterfuge is done;

When that which is and that which was
Apart, intrinsic, stand,
And this brief tragedy of flesh
Is shifted like a sand;

When figures show their royal front
And mists are carved away, --
Behold the atom I preferred
To all the lists of clay!





II.

I have no life but this,
To lead it here;
Nor any death, but lest
Dispelled from there;

Nor tie to earths to come,
Nor action new,
Except through this extent,
The realm of you.





III.

Your riches taught me poverty.
Myself a millionnaire
In little wealths, -- as girls could boast, --
Till broad as Buenos Ayre,

You drifted your dominions
A different Peru;
And I esteemed all poverty,
For life's estate with you.

Of mines I little know, myself,
But just the names of gems, --
The colors of the commonest;
And scarce of diadems

So much that, did I meet the queen,
Her glory I should know:
But this must be a different wealth,
To miss it beggars so.

I 'm sure 't is India all day
To those who look on you
Without a stint, without a blame, --
Might I but be the Jew!

I 'm sure it is Golconda,
Beyond my power to deem, --
To have a smile for mine each day,
How better than a gem!

At least, it solaces to know
That there exists a gold,
Although I prove it just in time
Its distance to behold!

It 's far, far treasure to surmise,
And estimate the pearl
That slipped my simple fingers through
While just a girl at school!





IV.

THE CONTRACT.

I gave myself to him,
And took himself for pay.
The solemn contract of a life
Was ratified this way.

The wealth might disappoint,
Myself a poorer prove
Than this great purchaser suspect,
The daily own of Love

Depreciate the vision;
But, till the merchant buy,
Still fable, in the isles of spice,
The subtle cargoes lie.

At least, 't is mutual risk, --
Some found it mutual gain;
Sweet debt of Life, -- each night to owe,
Insolvent, every noon.





V.

THE LETTER.

"GOING to him! Happy letter! Tell him --
Tell him the page I didn't write;
Tell him I only said the syntax,
And left the verb and the pronoun out.
Tell him just how the fingers hurried,
Then how they waded, slow, slow, slow;
And then you wished you had eyes in your pages,
So you could see what moved them so.

"Tell him it wasn't a practised writer,
You guessed, from the way the sentence toiled;
You could hear the bodice tug, behind you,
As if it held but the might of a child;
You almost pitied it, you, it worked so.
Tell him -- No, you may quibble there,
For it would split his heart to know it,
And then you and I were silenter.

"Tell him night finished before we finished,
And the old clock kept neighing 'day!'
And you got sleepy and begged to be ended --
What could it hinder so, to say?
Tell him just how she sealed you, cautious,
But if he ask where you are hid
Until to-morrow, -- happy letter!
Gesture, coquette, and shake your head!"





VI.

The way I read a letter 's this:
'T is first I lock the door,
And push it with my fingers next,
For transport it be sure.

And then I go the furthest off
To counteract a knock;
Then draw my little letter forth
And softly pick its lock.

Then, glancing narrow at the wall,
And narrow at the floor,
For firm conviction of a mouse
Not exorcised before,

Peruse how infinite I am
To -- no one that you know!
And sigh for lack of heaven, -- but not
The heaven the creeds bestow.





VII.

Wild nights! Wild nights!
Were I with thee,
Wild nights should be
Our luxury!

Futile the winds
To a heart in port, --
Done with the compass,
Done with the chart.

Rowing in Eden!
Ah! the sea!
Might I but moor
To-night in thee!





VIII.

AT HOME.

The night was wide, and furnished scant
With but a single star,
That often as a cloud it met
Blew out itself for fear.

The wind pursued the little bush,
And drove away the leaves
November left; then clambered up
And fretted in the eaves.

No squirrel went abroad;
A dog's belated feet
Like intermittent plush were heard
Adown the empty street.

To feel if blinds be fast,
And closer to the fire
Her little rocking-chair to draw,
And shiver for the poor,

The housewife's gentle task.
"How pleasanter," said she
Unto the sofa opposite,
"The sleet than May -- no thee!"





IX.

POSSESSION.

Did the harebell loose her girdle
To the lover bee,
Would the bee the harebell hallow
Much as formerly?

Did the paradise, persuaded,
Yield her moat of pearl,
Would the Eden be an Eden,
Or the earl an earl?





X.

A charm invests a face
Imperfectly beheld, --
The lady dare not lift her veil
For fear it be dispelled.

But peers beyond her mesh,
And wishes, and denies, --
Lest interview annul a want
That image satisfies.





XI.

THE LOVERS.

The rose did caper on her cheek,
Her bodice rose and fell,
Her pretty speech, like drunken men,
Did stagger pitiful.

Her fingers fumbled at her work, --
Her needle would not go;
What ailed so smart a little maid
It puzzled me to know,

Till opposite I spied a cheek
That bore another rose;
Just opposite, another speech
That like the drunkard goes;

A vest that, like the bodice, danced
To the immortal tune, --
Till those two troubled little clocks
Ticked softly into one.





XII.

In lands I never saw, they say,
Immortal Alps look down,
Whose bonnets touch the firmament,
Whose sandals touch the town, --

Meek at whose everlasting feet
A myriad daisies play.
Which, sir, are you, and which am I,
Upon an August day?





XIII.

The moon is distant from the sea,
And yet with amber hands
She leads him, docile as a boy,
Along appointed sands.

He never misses a degree;
Obedient to her eye,
He comes just so far toward the town,
Just so far goes away.

Oh, Signor, thine the amber hand,
And mine the distant sea, --
Obedient to the least command
Thine eyes impose on me.





XIV.

He put the belt around my life, --
I heard the buckle snap,
And turned away, imperial,
My lifetime folding up
Deliberate, as a duke would do
A kingdom's title-deed, --
Henceforth a dedicated sort,
A member of the cloud.

Yet not too far to come at call,
And do the little toils
That make the circuit of the rest,
And deal occasional smiles
To lives that stoop to notice mine
And kindly ask it in, --
Whose invitation, knew you not
For whom I must decline?





XV.

THE LOST JEWEL.

I held a jewel in my fingers
And went to sleep.
The day was warm, and winds were prosy;
I said: "'T will keep."

I woke and chid my honest fingers, --
The gem was gone;
And now an amethyst remembrance
Is all I own.





XVI.

What if I say I shall not wait?
What if I burst the fleshly gate
And pass, escaped, to thee?
What if I file this mortal off,
See where it hurt me, -- that 's enough, --
And wade in liberty?

They cannot take us any more, --
Dungeons may call, and guns implore;
Unmeaning now, to me,
As laughter was an hour ago,
Or laces, or a travelling show,
Or who died yesterday!









III. NATURE.


I.

MOTHER NATURE.

Nature, the gentlest mother,
Impatient of no child,
The feeblest or the waywardest, --
Her admonition mild

In forest and the hill
By traveller is heard,
Restraining rampant squirrel
Or too impetuous bird.

How fair her conversation,
A summer afternoon, --
Her household, her assembly;
And when the sun goes down

Her voice among the aisles
Incites the timid prayer
Of the minutest cricket,
The most unworthy flower.

When all the children sleep
She turns as long away
As will suffice to light her lamps;
Then, bending from the sky

With infinite affection
And infiniter care,
Her golden finger on her lip,
Wills silence everywhere.





II.

OUT OF THE MORNING.

Will there really be a morning?
Is there such a thing as day?
Could I see it from the mountains
If I were as tall as they?

Has it feet like water-lilies?
Has it feathers like a bird?
Is it brought from famous countries
Of which I have never heard?

Oh, some scholar! Oh, some sailor!
Oh, some wise man from the skies!
Please to tell a little pilgrim
Where the place called morning lies!





III.

At half-past three a single bird
Unto a silent sky
Propounded but a single term
Of cautious melody.

At half-past four, experiment
Had subjugated test,
And lo! her silver principle
Supplanted all the rest.

At half-past seven, element
Nor implement was seen,
And place was where the presence was,
Circumference between.





IV.

DAY'S PARLOR.

The day came slow, till five o'clock,
Then sprang before the hills
Like hindered rubies, or the light
A sudden musket spills.

The purple could not keep the east,
The sunrise shook from fold,
Like breadths of topaz, packed a night,
The lady just unrolled.

The happy winds their timbrels took;
The birds, in docile rows,
Arranged themselves around their prince
(The wind is prince of those).

The orchard sparkled like a Jew, --
How mighty 't was, to stay
A guest in this stupendous place,
The parlor of the day!





V.

THE SUN'S WOOING.

The sun just touched the morning;
The morning, happy thing,
Supposed that he had come to dwell,
And life would be all spring.

She felt herself supremer, --
A raised, ethereal thing;
Henceforth for her what holiday!
Meanwhile, her wheeling king

Trailed slow along the orchards
His haughty, spangled hems,
Leaving a new necessity, --
The want of diadems!

The morning fluttered, staggered,
Felt feebly for her crown, --
Her unanointed forehead
Henceforth her only one.






VI.

THE ROBIN.

The robin is the one
That interrupts the morn
With hurried, few, express reports
When March is scarcely on.

The robin is the one
That overflows the noon
With her cherubic quantity,
An April but begun.

The robin is the one
That speechless from her nest
Submits that home and certainty
And sanctity are best.





VII.

THE BUTTERFLY'S DAY.

From cocoon forth a butterfly
As lady from her door
Emerged -- a summer afternoon --
Repairing everywhere,

Without design, that I could trace,
Except to stray abroad
On miscellaneous enterprise
The clovers understood.

Her pretty parasol was seen
Contracting in a field
Where men made hay, then struggling hard
With an opposing cloud,

Where parties, phantom as herself,
To Nowhere seemed to go
In purposeless circumference,
As 't were a tropic show.

And notwithstanding bee that worked,
And flower that zealous blew,
This audience of idleness
Disdained them, from the sky,

Till sundown crept, a steady tide,
And men that made the hay,
And afternoon, and butterfly,
Extinguished in its sea.





VIII.

THE BLUEBIRD.

Before you thought of spring,
Except as a surmise,
You see, God bless his suddenness,
A fellow in the skies
Of independent hues,
A little weather-worn,
Inspiriting habiliments
Of indigo and brown.

With specimens of song,
As if for you to choose,
Discretion in the interval,
With gay delays he goes
To some superior tree
Without a single leaf,
And shouts for joy to nobody
But his seraphic self!





IX.

APRIL.

An altered look about the hills;
A Tyrian light the village fills;
A wider sunrise in the dawn;
A deeper twilight on the lawn;
A print of a vermilion foot;
A purple finger on the slope;
A flippant fly upon the pane;
A spider at his trade again;
An added strut in chanticleer;
A flower expected everywhere;
An axe shrill singing in the woods;
Fern-odors on untravelled roads, --
All this, and more I cannot tell,
A furtive look you know as well,
And Nicodemus' mystery
Receives its annual reply.





X.

THE SLEEPING FLOWERS.

"Whose are the little beds," I asked,
"Which in the valleys lie?"
Some shook their heads, and others smiled,
And no one made reply.

"Perhaps they did not hear," I said;
"I will inquire again.
Whose are the beds, the tiny beds
So thick upon the plain?"

"'T is daisy in the shortest;
A little farther on,
Nearest the door to wake the first,
Little leontodon.

"'T is iris, sir, and aster,
Anemone and bell,
Batschia in the blanket red,
And chubby daffodil."

Meanwhile at many cradles
Her busy foot she plied,
Humming the quaintest lullaby
That ever rocked a child.

"Hush! Epigea wakens! --
The crocus stirs her lids,
Rhodora's cheek is crimson, --
She's dreaming of the woods."

Then, turning from them, reverent,
"Their bed-time 't is," she said;
"The bumble-bees will wake them
When April woods are red."





XI.

MY ROSE.

Pigmy seraphs gone astray,
Velvet people from Vevay,
Belles from some lost summer day,
Bees' exclusive coterie.
Paris could not lay the fold
Belted down with emerald;
Venice could not show a cheek
Of a tint so lustrous meek.
Never such an ambuscade
As of brier and leaf displayed
For my little damask maid.
I had rather wear her grace
Than an earl's distinguished face;
I had rather dwell like her
Than be Duke of Exeter
Royalty enough for me
To subdue the bumble-bee!





XII.

THE ORIOLE'S SECRET.

To hear an oriole sing
May be a common thing,
Or only a divine.

It is not of the bird
Who sings the same, unheard,
As unto crowd.

The fashion of the ear
Attireth that it hear
In dun or fair.

So whether it be rune,
Or whether it be none,
Is of within;

The "tune is in the tree,"
The sceptic showeth me;
"No, sir! In thee!"





XIII.

THE ORIOLE.

One of the ones that Midas touched,
Who failed to touch us all,
Was that confiding prodigal,
The blissful oriole.

So drunk, he disavows it
With badinage divine;
So dazzling, we mistake him
For an alighting mine.

A pleader, a dissembler,
An epicure, a thief, --
Betimes an oratorio,
An ecstasy in chief;

The Jesuit of orchards,
He cheats as he enchants
Of an entire attar
For his decamping wants.

The splendor of a Burmah,
The meteor of birds,
Departing like a pageant
Of ballads and of bards.

I never thought that Jason sought
For any golden fleece;
But then I am a rural man,
With thoughts that make for peace.

But if there were a Jason,
Tradition suffer me
Behold his lost emolument
Upon the apple-tree.





XIV.

IN SHADOW.

I dreaded that first robin so,
But he is mastered now,
And I 'm accustomed to him grown, --
He hurts a little, though.

I thought if I could only live
Till that first shout got by,
Not all pianos in the woods
Had power to mangle me.

I dared not meet the daffodils,
For fear their yellow gown
Would pierce me with a fashion
So foreign to my own.

I wished the grass would hurry,
So when 't was time to see,
He 'd be too tall, the tallest one
Could stretch to look at me.

I could not bear the bees should come,
I wished they 'd stay away
In those dim countries where they go:
What word had they for me?

They 're here, though; not a creature failed,
No blossom stayed away
In gentle deference to me,
The Queen of Calvary.

Each one salutes me as he goes,
And I my childish plumes
Lift, in bereaved acknowledgment
Of their unthinking drums.





XV.

THE HUMMING-BIRD.

A route of evanescence
With a revolving wheel;
A resonance of emerald,
A rush of cochineal;
And every blossom on the bush
Adjusts its tumbled head, --
The mail from Tunis, probably,
An easy morning's ride.





XVI.

SECRETS.

The skies can't keep their secret!
They tell it to the hills --
The hills just tell the orchards --
And they the daffodils!

A bird, by chance, that goes that way
Soft overheard the whole.
If I should bribe the little bird,
Who knows but she would tell?

I think I won't, however,
It's finer not to know;
If summer were an axiom,
What sorcery had snow?

So keep your secret, Father!
I would not, if I could,
Know what the sapphire fellows do,
In your new-fashioned world!





XVII.

Who robbed the woods,
The trusting woods?
The unsuspecting trees
Brought out their burrs and mosses
His fantasy to please.
He scanned their trinkets, curious,
He grasped, he bore away.
What will the solemn hemlock,
What will the fir-tree say?





XVIII.

TWO VOYAGERS.

Two butterflies went out at noon
And waltzed above a stream,
Then stepped straight through the firmament
And rested on a beam;

And then together bore away
Upon a shining sea, --
Though never yet, in any port,
Their coming mentioned be.

If spoken by the distant bird,
If met in ether sea
By frigate or by merchantman,
Report was not to me.





XIX.

BY THE SEA.

I started early, took my dog,
And visited the sea;
The mermaids in the basement
Came out to look at me,

And frigates in the upper floor
Extended hempen hands,
Presuming me to be a mouse
Aground, upon the sands.

But no man moved me till the tide
Went past my simple shoe,
And past my apron and my belt,
And past my bodice too,

And made as he would eat me up
As wholly as a dew
Upon a dandelion's sleeve --
And then I started too.

And he -- he followed close behind;
I felt his silver heel
Upon my ankle, -- then my shoes
Would overflow with pearl.

Until we met the solid town,
No man he seemed to know;
And bowing with a mighty look
At me, the sea withdrew.





XX.

OLD-FASHIONED.

Arcturus is his other name, --
I'd rather call him star!
It's so unkind of science
To go and interfere!

I pull a flower from the woods, --
A monster with a glass
Computes the stamens in a breath,
And has her in a class.

Whereas I took the butterfly
Aforetime in my hat,
He sits erect in cabinets,
The clover-bells forgot.

What once was heaven, is zenith now.
Where I proposed to go
When time's brief masquerade was done,
Is mapped, and charted too!

What if the poles should frisk about
And stand upon their heads!
I hope I 'm ready for the worst,
Whatever prank betides!

Perhaps the kingdom of Heaven 's changed!
I hope the children there
Won't be new-fashioned when I come,
And laugh at me, and stare!

I hope the father in the skies
Will lift his little girl, --
Old-fashioned, naughty, everything, --
Over the stile of pearl!





XXI.

A TEMPEST.

An awful tempest mashed the air,
The clouds were gaunt and few;
A black, as of a spectre's cloak,
Hid heaven and earth from view.

The creatures chuckled on the roofs
And whistled in the air,
And shook their fists and gnashed their teeth.
And swung their frenzied hair.

The morning lit, the birds arose;
The monster's faded eyes
Turned slowly to his native coast,
And peace was Paradise!





XXII.

THE SEA.

An everywhere of silver,
With ropes of sand
To keep it from effacing
The track called land.





XXIII.

IN THE GARDEN.

A bird came down the walk:
He did not know I saw;
He bit an angle-worm in halves
And ate the fellow, raw.

And then he drank a dew
From a convenient grass,
And then hopped sidewise to the wall
To let a beetle pass.

He glanced with rapid eyes
That hurried all abroad, --
They looked like frightened beads, I thought;
He stirred his velvet head

Like one in danger; cautious,
I offered him a crumb,
And he unrolled his feathers
And rowed him softer home

Than oars divide the ocean,
Too silver for a seam,
Or butterflies, off banks of noon,
Leap, splashless, as they swim.





XXIV.

THE SNAKE.

A narrow fellow in the grass
Occasionally rides;
You may have met him, -- did you not,
His notice sudden is.

The grass divides as with a comb,
A spotted shaft is seen;
And then it closes at your feet
And opens further on.

He likes a boggy acre,
A floor too cool for corn.
Yet when a child, and barefoot,
I more than once, at morn,

Have passed, I thought, a whip-lash
Unbraiding in the sun, --
When, stooping to secure it,
It wrinkled, and was gone.

Several of nature's people
I know, and they know me;
I feel for them a transport
Of cordiality;

But never met this fellow,
Attended or alone,
Without a tighter breathing,
And zero at the bone.





XXV.

THE MUSHROOM.

The mushroom is the elf of plants,
At evening it is not;
At morning in a truffled hut
It stops upon a spot

As if it tarried always;
And yet its whole career
Is shorter than a snake's delay,
And fleeter than a tare.

'T is vegetation's juggler,
The germ of alibi;
Doth like a bubble antedate,
And like a bubble hie.

I feel as if the grass were pleased
To have it intermit;
The surreptitious scion
Of summer's circumspect.

Had nature any outcast face,
Could she a son contemn,
Had nature an Iscariot,
That mushroom, -- it is him.





XXVI.

THE STORM.

There came a wind like a bugle;
It quivered through the grass,
And a green chill upon the heat
So ominous did pass
We barred the windows and the doors
As from an emerald ghost;
The doom's electric moccason
That very instant passed.
On a strange mob of panting trees,
And fences fled away,
And rivers where the houses ran
The living looked that day.
The bell within the steeple wild
The flying tidings whirled.
How much can come
And much can go,
And yet abide the world!





XXVII.

THE SPIDER.

A spider sewed at night
Without a light
Upon an arc of white.
If ruff it was of dame
Or shroud of gnome,
Himself, himself inform.
Of immortality
His strategy
Was physiognomy.





XXVIII.

I know a place where summer strives
With such a practised frost,
She each year leads her daisies back,
Recording briefly, "Lost."

But when the south wind stirs the pools
And struggles in the lanes,
Her heart misgives her for her vow,
And she pours soft refrains

Into the lap of adamant,
And spices, and the dew,
That stiffens quietly to quartz,
Upon her amber shoe.





XXIX.

The one that could repeat the summer day
Were greater than itself, though he
Minutest of mankind might be.
And who could reproduce the sun,
At period of going down --
The lingering and the stain, I mean --
When Orient has been outgrown,
And Occident becomes unknown,
His name remain.





XXX.

THE WIND'S VISIT.

The wind tapped like a tired man,
And like a host, "Come in,"
I boldly answered; entered then
My residence within

A rapid, footless guest,
To offer whom a chair
Were as impossible as hand
A sofa to the air.

No bone had he to bind him,
His speech was like the push
Of numerous humming-birds at once
From a superior bush.

His countenance a billow,
His fingers, if he pass,
Let go a music, as of tunes
Blown tremulous in glass.

He visited, still flitting;
Then, like a timid man,
Again he tapped -- 't was flurriedly --
And I became alone.





XXXI.

Nature rarer uses yellow
   Than another hue;
Saves she all of that for sunsets, --
   Prodigal of blue,

Spending scarlet like a woman,
   Yellow she affords
Only scantly and selectly,
   Like a lover's words.





XXXII.

GOSSIP.

The leaves, like women, interchange
  Sagacious confidence;
Somewhat of nods, and somewhat of
  Portentous inference,

The parties in both cases
  Enjoining secrecy, --
Inviolable compact
  To notoriety.





XXXIII.

SIMPLICITY.

How happy is the little stone
That rambles in the road alone,
And doesn't care about careers,
And exigencies never fears;
Whose coat of elemental brown
A passing universe put on;
And independent as the sun,
Associates or glows alone,
Fulfilling absolute decree
In casual simplicity.





XXXIV.

STORM.

It sounded as if the streets were running,
And then the streets stood still.
Eclipse was all we could see at the window,
And awe was all we could feel.

By and by the boldest stole out of his covert,
To see if time was there.
Nature was in her beryl apron,
Mixing fresher air.





XXXV.

THE RAT.

The rat is the concisest tenant.
He pays no rent, --
Repudiates the obligation,
On schemes intent.

Balking our wit
To sound or circumvent,
Hate cannot harm
A foe so reticent.

Neither decree
Prohibits him,
Lawful as
Equilibrium.





XXXVI.

Frequently the woods are pink,
Frequently are brown;
Frequently the hills undress
Behind my native town.

Oft a head is crested
I was wont to see,
And as oft a cranny
Where it used to be.

And the earth, they tell me,
On its axis turned, --
Wonderful rotation
By but twelve performed!





XXXVII.

A THUNDER-STORM.

The wind begun to rock the grass
With threatening tunes and low, --
He flung a menace at the earth,
A menace at the sky.

The leaves unhooked themselves from trees
And started all abroad;
The dust did scoop itself like hands
And throw away the road.

The wagons quickened on the streets,
The thunder hurried slow;
The lightning showed a yellow beak,
And then a livid claw.

The birds put up the bars to nests,
The cattle fled to barns;
There came one drop of giant rain,
And then, as if the hands

That held the dams had parted hold,
The waters wrecked the sky,
But overlooked my father's house,
Just quartering a tree.





XXXVIII.

WITH FLOWERS.

South winds jostle them,
Bumblebees come,
Hover, hesitate,
Drink, and are gone.

Butterflies pause
On their passage Cashmere;
I, softly plucking,
Present them here!





XXXIX.

SUNSET.

Where ships of purple gently toss
On seas of daffodil,
Fantastic sailors mingle,
And then -- the wharf is still.





XL.

She sweeps with many-colored brooms,
And leaves the shreds behind;
Oh, housewife in the evening west,
Come back, and dust the pond!

You dropped a purple ravelling in,
You dropped an amber thread;
And now you 've littered all the East
With duds of emerald!

And still she plies her spotted brooms,
And still the aprons fly,
Till brooms fade softly into stars --
And then I come away.





XLI.

Like mighty footlights burned the red
At bases of the trees, --
The far theatricals of day
Exhibiting to these.

'T was universe that did applaud
While, chiefest of the crowd,
Enabled by his royal dress,
Myself distinguished God.





XLII.

PROBLEMS.

Bring me the sunset in a cup,
Reckon the morning's flagons up,
   And say how many dew;
Tell me how far the morning leaps,
Tell me what time the weaver sleeps
   Who spun the breadths of blue!

Write me how many notes there be
In the new robin's ecstasy
   Among astonished boughs;
How many trips the tortoise makes,
How many cups the bee partakes, --
   The debauchee of dews!

Also, who laid the rainbow's piers,
Also, who leads the docile spheres
   By withes of supple blue?
Whose fingers string the stalactite,
Who counts the wampum of the night,
   To see that none is due?

Who built this little Alban house
And shut the windows down so close
   My spirit cannot see?
Who 'll let me out some gala day,
With implements to fly away,
   Passing pomposity?





XLIII.

THE JUGGLER OF DAY.

Blazing in gold and quenching in purple,
Leaping like leopards to the sky,
Then at the feet of the old horizon
Laying her spotted face, to die;

Stooping as low as the otter's window,
Touching the roof and tinting the barn,
Kissing her bonnet to the meadow, --
And the juggler of day is gone!




XLIV.

MY CRICKET.

Farther in summer than the birds,
Pathetic from the grass,
A minor nation celebrates
Its unobtrusive mass.

No ordinance is seen,
So gradual the grace,
A pensive custom it becomes,
Enlarging loneliness.

Antiquest felt at noon
When August, burning low,
Calls forth this spectral canticle,
Repose to typify.

Remit as yet no grace,
No furrow on the glow,
Yet a druidic difference
Enhances nature now.




XLV.

As imperceptibly as grief
The summer lapsed away, --
Too imperceptible, at last,
To seem like perfidy.

A quietness distilled,
As twilight long begun,
Or Nature, spending with herself
Sequestered afternoon.

The dusk drew earlier in,
The morning foreign shone, --
A courteous, yet harrowing grace,
As guest who would be gone.

And thus, without a wing,
Or service of a keel,
Our summer made her light escape
Into the beautiful.





XLVI.

It can't be summer, -- that got through;
It 's early yet for spring;
There 's that long town of white to cross
Before the blackbirds sing.

It can't be dying, -- it's too rouge, --
The dead shall go in white.
So sunset shuts my question down
With clasps of chrysolite.





XLVII.

SUMMER'S OBSEQUIES.

The gentian weaves her fringes,
The maple's loom is red.
My departing blossoms
Obviate parade.

A brief, but patient illness,
An hour to prepare;
And one, below this morning,
Is where the angels are.

It was a short procession, --
The bobolink was there,
An aged bee addressed us,
And then we knelt in prayer.

We trust that she was willing, --
We ask that we may be.
Summer, sister, seraph,
Let us go with thee!

In the name of the bee
And of the butterfly
And of the breeze, amen!





XLVIII.

FRINGED GENTIAN.

God made a little gentian;
It tried to be a rose
And failed, and all the summer laughed.
But just before the snows
There came a purple creature
That ravished all the hill;
And summer hid her forehead,
And mockery was still.
The frosts were her condition;
The Tyrian would not come
Until the North evoked it.
"Creator! shall I bloom?"





XLIX.

NOVEMBER.

Besides the autumn poets sing,
A few prosaic days
A little this side of the snow
And that side of the haze.

A few incisive mornings,
A few ascetic eyes, --
Gone Mr. Bryant's golden-rod,
And Mr. Thomson's sheaves.

Still is the bustle in the brook,
Sealed are the spicy valves;
Mesmeric fingers softly touch
The eyes of many elves.

Perhaps a squirrel may remain,
My sentiments to share.
Grant me, O Lord, a sunny mind,
Thy windy will to bear!





L.

THE SNOW.

It sifts from leaden sieves,
It powders all the wood,
It fills with alabaster wool
The wrinkles of the road.

It makes an even face
Of mountain and of plain, --
Unbroken forehead from the east
Unto the east again.

It reaches to the fence,
It wraps it, rail by rail,
Till it is lost in fleeces;
It flings a crystal veil

On stump and stack and stem, --
The summer's empty room,
Acres of seams where harvests were,
Recordless, but for them.

It ruffles wrists of posts,
As ankles of a queen, --
Then stills its artisans like ghosts,
Denying they have been.





LI.

THE BLUE JAY.

No brigadier throughout the year
So civic as the jay.
A neighbor and a warrior too,
With shrill felicity

Pursuing winds that censure us
A February day,
The brother of the universe
Was never blown away.

The snow and he are intimate;
I 've often seen them play
When heaven looked upon us all
With such severity,

I felt apology were due
To an insulted sky,
Whose pompous frown was nutriment
To their temerity.

The pillow of this daring head
Is pungent evergreens;
His larder -- terse and militant --
Unknown, refreshing things;

His character a tonic,
His future a dispute;
Unfair an immortality
That leaves this neighbor out.






IV. TIME AND ETERNITY.


I.

Let down the bars, O Death!
The tired flocks come in
Whose bleating ceases to repeat,
Whose wandering is done.

Thine is the stillest night,
Thine the securest fold;
Too near thou art for seeking thee,
Too tender to be told.





II.

Going to heaven!
I don't know when,
Pray do not ask me how, --
Indeed, I 'm too astonished
To think of answering you!
Going to heaven! --
How dim it sounds!
And yet it will be done
As sure as flocks go home at night
Unto the shepherd's arm!

Perhaps you 're going too!
Who knows?
If you should get there first,
Save just a little place for me
Close to the two I lost!

The smallest "robe" will fit me,
And just a bit of "crown;"
For you know we do not mind our dress
When we are going home.

I 'm glad I don't believe it,
For it would stop my breath,
And I 'd like to look a little more
At such a curious earth!
I am glad they did believe it
Whom I have never found
Since the mighty autumn afternoon
I left them in the ground.





III.

At least to pray is left, is left.
O Jesus! in the air
I know not which thy chamber is, --
I 'm knocking everywhere.

Thou stirrest earthquake in the South,
And maelstrom in the sea;
Say, Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
Hast thou no arm for me?





IV.

EPITAPH.

Step lightly on this narrow spot!
The broadest land that grows
Is not so ample as the breast
These emerald seams enclose.

Step lofty; for this name is told
As far as cannon dwell,
Or flag subsist, or fame export
Her deathless syllable.





V.

Morns like these we parted;
Noons like these she rose,
Fluttering first, then firmer,
To her fair repose.

Never did she lisp it,
And 't was not for me;
She was mute from transport,
I, from agony!

Till the evening, nearing,
One the shutters drew --
Quick! a sharper rustling!
And this linnet flew!





VI.

A death-blow is a life-blow to some
Who, till they died, did not alive become;
Who, had they lived, had died, but when
They died, vitality begun.





VII.

I read my sentence steadily,
Reviewed it with my eyes,
To see that I made no mistake
In its extremest clause, --

The date, and manner of the shame;
And then the pious form
That "God have mercy" on the soul
The jury voted him.

I made my soul familiar
With her extremity,
That at the last it should not be
A novel agony,

But she and Death, acquainted,
Meet tranquilly as friends,
Salute and pass without a hint --
And there the matter ends.





VIII.

I have not told my garden yet,
Lest that should conquer me;
I have not quite the strength now
To break it to the bee.

I will not name it in the street,
For shops would stare, that I,
So shy, so very ignorant,
Should have the face to die.

The hillsides must not know it,
Where I have rambled so,
Nor tell the loving forests
The day that I shall go,

Nor lisp it at the table,
Nor heedless by the way
Hint that within the riddle
One will walk to-day!





IX.

THE BATTLE-FIELD.

They dropped like flakes, they dropped like stars,
   Like petals from a rose,
When suddenly across the June
   A wind with fingers goes.

They perished in the seamless grass, --
   No eye could find the place;
But God on his repealless list
   Can summon every face.





X.

The only ghost I ever saw
Was dressed in mechlin, -- so;
He wore no sandal on his foot,
And stepped like flakes of snow.
His gait was soundless, like the bird,
But rapid, like the roe;
His fashions quaint, mosaic,
Or, haply, mistletoe.

His conversation seldom,
His laughter like the breeze
That dies away in dimples
Among the pensive trees.
Our interview was transient,--
Of me, himself was shy;
And God forbid I look behind
Since that appalling day!





XI.

Some, too fragile for winter winds,
The thoughtful grave encloses, --
Tenderly tucking them in from frost
Before their feet are cold.

Never the treasures in her nest
The cautious grave exposes,
Building where schoolboy dare not look
And sportsman is not bold.

This covert have all the children
Early aged, and often cold, --
Sparrows unnoticed by the Father;
Lambs for whom time had not a fold.





XII.

As by the dead we love to sit,
Become so wondrous dear,
As for the lost we grapple,
Though all the rest are here, --

In broken mathematics
We estimate our prize,
Vast, in its fading ratio,
To our penurious eyes!





XIII.

MEMORIALS.

Death sets a thing significant
The eye had hurried by,
Except a perished creature
Entreat us tenderly

To ponder little workmanships
In crayon or in wool,
With "This was last her fingers did,"
Industrious until

The thimble weighed too heavy,
The stitches stopped themselves,
And then 't was put among the dust
Upon the closet shelves.

A book I have, a friend gave,
Whose pencil, here and there,
Had notched the place that pleased him, --
At rest his fingers are.

Now, when I read, I read not,
For interrupting tears
Obliterate the etchings
Too costly for repairs.





XIV.

I went to heaven, --
'T was a small town,
Lit with a ruby,
Lathed with down.
Stiller than the fields
At the full dew,
Beautiful as pictures
No man drew.
People like the moth,
Of mechlin, frames,
Duties of gossamer,
And eider names.
Almost contented
I could be
'Mong such unique
Society.





XV.

Their height in heaven comforts not,
Their glory nought to me;
'T was best imperfect, as it was;
I 'm finite, I can't see.

The house of supposition,
The glimmering frontier
That skirts the acres of perhaps,
To me shows insecure.

The wealth I had contented me;
If 't was a meaner size,
Then I had counted it until
It pleased my narrow eyes

Better than larger values,
However true their show;
This timid life of evidence
Keeps pleading, "I don't know."





XVI.

There is a shame of nobleness
Confronting sudden pelf, --
A finer shame of ecstasy
Convicted of itself.

A best disgrace a brave man feels,
Acknowledged of the brave, --
One more "Ye Blessed" to be told;
But this involves the grave.





XVII.

TRIUMPH.

Triumph may be of several kinds.
There 's triumph in the room
When that old imperator, Death,
By faith is overcome.

There 's triumph of the finer mind
When truth, affronted long,
Advances calm to her supreme,
Her God her only throng.

A triumph when temptation's bribe
Is slowly handed back,
One eye upon the heaven renounced
And one upon the rack.

Severer triumph, by himself
Experienced, who can pass
Acquitted from that naked bar,
Jehovah's countenance!





XVIII.

Pompless no life can pass away;
    The lowliest career
To the same pageant wends its way
    As that exalted here.
How cordial is the mystery!
    The hospitable pall
A "this way" beckons spaciously, --
    A miracle for all!





XIX.

I noticed people disappeared,
When but a little child, --
Supposed they visited remote,
Or settled regions wild.

Now know I they both visited
And settled regions wild,
But did because they died, -- a fact
Withheld the little child!





XX.

FOLLOWING.

I had no cause to be awake,
My best was gone to sleep,
And morn a new politeness took,
And failed to wake them up,

But called the others clear,
And passed their curtains by.
Sweet morning, when I over-sleep,
Knock, recollect, for me!

I looked at sunrise once,
And then I looked at them,
And wishfulness in me arose
For circumstance the same.

'T was such an ample peace,
It could not hold a sigh, --
'T was Sabbath with the bells divorced,
'T was sunset all the day.

So choosing but a gown
And taking but a prayer,
The only raiment I should need,
I struggled, and was there.





XXI.

If anybody's friend be dead,
It 's sharpest of the theme
The thinking how they walked alive,
At such and such a time.

Their costume, of a Sunday,
Some manner of the hair, --
A prank nobody knew but them,
Lost, in the sepulchre.

How warm they were on such a day:
You almost feel the date,
So short way off it seems; and now,
They 're centuries from that.

How pleased they were at what you said;
You try to touch the smile,
And dip your fingers in the frost:
When was it, can you tell,

You asked the company to tea,
Acquaintance, just a few,
And chatted close with this grand thing
That don't remember you?

Past bows and invitations,
Past interview, and vow,
Past what ourselves can estimate, --
That makes the quick of woe!





XXII.

THE JOURNEY.

Our journey had advanced;
Our feet were almost come
To that odd fork in Being's road,
Eternity by term.

Our pace took sudden awe,
Our feet reluctant led.
Before were cities, but between,
The forest of the dead.

Retreat was out of hope, --
Behind, a sealed route,
Eternity's white flag before,
And God at every gate.





XXIII.

A COUNTRY BURIAL.

Ample make this bed.
Make this bed with awe;
In it wait till judgment break
Excellent and fair.

Be its mattress straight,
Be its pillow round;
Let no sunrise' yellow noise
Interrupt this ground.





XXIV.

GOING.

On such a night, or such a night,
Would anybody care
If such a little figure
Slipped quiet from its chair,

So quiet, oh, how quiet!
That nobody might know
But that the little figure
Rocked softer, to and fro?

On such a dawn, or such a dawn,
Would anybody sigh
That such a little figure
Too sound asleep did lie

For chanticleer to wake it, --
Or stirring house below,
Or giddy bird in orchard,
Or early task to do?

There was a little figure plump
For every little knoll,
Busy needles, and spools of thread,
And trudging feet from school.

Playmates, and holidays, and nuts,
And visions vast and small.
Strange that the feet so precious charged
Should reach so small a goal!





XXV.

Essential oils are wrung:
The attar from the rose
Is not expressed by suns alone,
It is the gift of screws.

The general rose decays;
But this, in lady's drawer,
Makes summer when the lady lies
In ceaseless rosemary.




XXVI.

I lived on dread; to those who know
The stimulus there is
In danger, other impetus
Is numb and vital-less.

As 't were a spur upon the soul,
A fear will urge it where
To go without the spectre's aid
Were challenging despair.





XXVII.

If I should die,
And you should live,
And time should gurgle on,
And morn should beam,
And noon should burn,
As it has usual done;
If birds should build as early,
And bees as bustling go, --
One might depart at option
From enterprise below!
'T is sweet to know that stocks will stand
When we with daisies lie,
That commerce will continue,
And trades as briskly fly.
It makes the parting tranquil
And keeps the soul serene,
That gentlemen so sprightly
Conduct the pleasing scene!





XXVIII.

AT LENGTH.

Her final summer was it,
And yet we guessed it not;
If tenderer industriousness
Pervaded her, we thought

A further force of life
Developed from within, --
When Death lit all the shortness up,
And made the hurry plain.

We wondered at our blindness, --
When nothing was to see
But her Carrara guide-post, --
At our stupidity,

When, duller than our dullness,
The busy darling lay,
So busy was she, finishing,
So leisurely were we!





XXIX.

GHOSTS.

One need not be a chamber to be haunted,
One need not be a house;
The brain has corridors surpassing
Material place.

Far safer, of a midnight meeting
External ghost,
Than an interior confronting
That whiter host.

Far safer through an Abbey gallop,
The stones achase,
Than, moonless, one's own self encounter
In lonesome place.

Ourself, behind ourself concealed,
Should startle most;
Assassin, hid in our apartment,
Be horror's least.

The prudent carries a revolver,
He bolts the door,
O'erlooking a superior spectre
More near.





XXX.

VANISHED.

She died, -- this was the way she died;
And when her breath was done,
Took up her simple wardrobe
And started for the sun.

Her little figure at the gate
The angels must have spied,
Since I could never find her
Upon the mortal side.





XXXI.

PRECEDENCE.

Wait till the majesty of Death
Invests so mean a brow!
Almost a powdered footman
Might dare to touch it now!

Wait till in everlasting robes
This democrat is dressed,
Then prate about "preferment"
And "station" and the rest!

Around this quiet courtier
Obsequious angels wait!
Full royal is his retinue,
Full purple is his state!

A lord might dare to lift the hat
To such a modest clay,
Since that my Lord, "the Lord of lords"
Receives unblushingly!





XXXII.

GONE.

Went up a year this evening!
I recollect it well!
Amid no bells nor bravos
The bystanders will tell!
Cheerful, as to the village,
Tranquil, as to repose,
Chastened, as to the chapel,
This humble tourist rose.
Did not talk of returning,
Alluded to no time
When, were the gales propitious,
We might look for him;
Was grateful for the roses
In life's diverse bouquet,
Talked softly of new species
To pick another day.

Beguiling thus the wonder,
The wondrous nearer drew;
Hands bustled at the moorings --
The crowd respectful grew.
Ascended from our vision
To countenances new!
A difference, a daisy,
Is all the rest I knew!





XXXIII.

REQUIEM.

Taken from men this morning,
Carried by men to-day,
Met by the gods with banners
Who marshalled her away.

One little maid from playmates,
One little mind from school, --
There must be guests in Eden;
All the rooms are full.

Far as the east from even,
Dim as the border star, --
Courtiers quaint, in kingdoms,
Our departed are.





XXXIV.

What inn is this
Where for the night
Peculiar traveller comes?
Who is the landlord?
Where the maids?
Behold, what curious rooms!
No ruddy fires on the hearth,
No brimming tankards flow.
Necromancer, landlord,
Who are these below?





XXXV.

It was not death, for I stood up,
And all the dead lie down;
It was not night, for all the bells
Put out their tongues, for noon.

It was not frost, for on my flesh
I felt siroccos crawl, --
Nor fire, for just my marble feet
Could keep a chancel cool.

And yet it tasted like them all;
The figures I have seen
Set orderly, for burial,
Reminded me of mine,

As if my life were shaven
And fitted to a frame,
And could not breathe without a key;
And 't was like midnight, some,

When everything that ticked has stopped,
And space stares, all around,
Or grisly frosts, first autumn morns,
Repeal the beating ground.

But most like chaos, -- stopless, cool, --
Without a chance or spar,
Or even a report of land
To justify despair.





XXXVI.

TILL THE END.

I should not dare to leave my friend,
Because -- because if he should die
While I was gone, and I -- too late --
Should reach the heart that wanted me;

If I should disappoint the eyes
That hunted, hunted so, to see,
And could not bear to shut until
They "noticed" me -- they noticed me;

If I should stab the patient faith
So sure I 'd come -- so sure I 'd come,
It listening, listening, went to sleep
Telling my tardy name, --

My heart would wish it broke before,
Since breaking then, since breaking then,
Were useless as next morning's sun,
Where midnight frosts had lain!





XXXVII.

VOID.

Great streets of silence led away
To neighborhoods of pause;
Here was no notice, no dissent,
No universe, no laws.

By clocks 't was morning, and for night
The bells at distance called;
But epoch had no basis here,
For period exhaled.





XXXVIII.

A throe upon the features
A hurry in the breath,
An ecstasy of parting
Denominated "Death," --

An anguish at the mention,
Which, when to patience grown,
I 've known permission given
To rejoin its own.





XXXIX.

SAVED!

Of tribulation these are they
Denoted by the white;
The spangled gowns, a lesser rank
Of victors designate.

All these did conquer; but the ones
Who overcame most times
Wear nothing commoner than snow,
No ornament but palms.

Surrender is a sort unknown
On this superior soil;
Defeat, an outgrown anguish,
Remembered as the mile

Our panting ankle barely gained
When night devoured the road;
But we stood whispering in the house,
And all we said was "Saved"!





XL.

I think just how my shape will rise
When I shall be forgiven,
Till hair and eyes and timid head
Are out of sight, in heaven.

I think just how my lips will weigh
With shapeless, quivering prayer
That you, so late, consider me,
The sparrow of your care.

I mind me that of anguish sent,
Some drifts were moved away
Before my simple bosom broke, --
And why not this, if they?

And so, until delirious borne
I con that thing, -- "forgiven," --
Till with long fright and longer trust
I drop my heart, unshriven!





XLI.

THE FORGOTTEN GRAVE.

After a hundred years
Nobody knows the place, --
Agony, that enacted there,
Motionless as peace.

Weeds triumphant ranged,
Strangers strolled and spelled
At the lone orthography
Of the elder dead.

Winds of summer fields
Recollect the way, --
Instinct picking up the key
Dropped by memory.





XLII.

Lay this laurel on the one
Too intrinsic for renown.
Laurel! veil your deathless tree, --
Him you chasten, that is he!








POEMS

by EMILY DICKINSON

Third Series




Edited by

MABEL LOOMIS TODD



    It's all I have to bring to-day,
      This, and my heart beside,
    This, and my heart, and all the fields,
      And all the meadows wide.
    Be sure you count, should I forget, --
      Some one the sum could tell, --
    This, and my heart, and all the bees
      Which in the clover dwell.



PREFACE.

The intellectual activity of Emily Dickinson was so great that
a large and characteristic choice is still possible among her
literary material, and this third volume of her verses is put
forth in response to the repeated wish of the admirers of her
peculiar genius. Much of Emily Dickinson's prose was rhythmic,
--even rhymed, though frequently not set apart in lines.

Also many verses, written as such, were sent to friends in
letters; these were published in 1894, in the volumes of her
_Letters_. It has not been necessary, however, to include them in
this Series, and all have been omitted, except three or four
exceptionally strong ones, as "A Book," and "With Flowers."

There is internal evidence that many of the poems were simply
spontaneous flashes of insight, apparently unrelated to outward
circumstance. Others, however, had an obvious personal origin;
for example, the verses "I had a Guinea golden," which seem to
have been sent to some friend travelling in Europe, as a dainty
reminder of letter-writing delinquencies. The surroundings in
which any of Emily Dickinson's verses are known to have been
written usually serve to explain them clearly; but in general the
present volume is full of thoughts needing no interpretation to
those who apprehend this scintillating spirit.

                                        M. L. T.

AMHERST, _October_, 1896.




I. LIFE.


I.

REAL RICHES.

'T is little I could care for pearls
  Who own the ample sea;
Or brooches, when the Emperor
  With rubies pelteth me;

Or gold, who am the Prince of Mines;
  Or diamonds, when I see
A diadem to fit a dome
  Continual crowning me.





II.

SUPERIORITY TO FATE.

Superiority to fate
  Is difficult to learn.
'T is not conferred by any,
  But possible to earn

A pittance at a time,
  Until, to her surprise,
The soul with strict economy
  Subsists till Paradise.





III.

HOPE.

Hope is a subtle glutton;
  He feeds upon the fair;
And yet, inspected closely,
  What abstinence is there!

His is the halcyon table
  That never seats but one,
And whatsoever is consumed
  The same amounts remain.





IV.

FORBIDDEN FRUIT.

I.

Forbidden fruit a flavor has
  That lawful orchards mocks;
How luscious lies the pea within
  The pod that Duty locks!





V.

FORBIDDEN FRUIT.

II.

Heaven is what I cannot reach!
  The apple on the tree,
Provided it do hopeless hang,
  That 'heaven' is, to me.

The color on the cruising cloud,
  The interdicted ground
Behind the hill, the house behind, --
  There Paradise is found!





VI.

A WORD.

A word is dead
When it is said,
  Some say.
I say it just
Begins to live
  That day.





VII.

To venerate the simple days
  Which lead the seasons by,
Needs but to remember
  That from you or me
They may take the trifle
  Termed mortality!

To invest existence with a stately air,
Needs but to remember
  That the acorn there
Is the egg of forests
  For the upper air!





VIII.

LIFE'S TRADES.

It's such a little thing to weep,
  So short a thing to sigh;
And yet by trades the size of these
  We men and women die!





IX.

Drowning is not so pitiful
  As the attempt to rise.
Three times, 't is said, a sinking man
  Comes up to face the skies,
And then declines forever
  To that abhorred abode
Where hope and he part company, --
  For he is grasped of God.
The Maker's cordial visage,
  However good to see,
Is shunned, we must admit it,
  Like an adversity.





X.

How still the bells in steeples stand,
  Till, swollen with the sky,
They leap upon their silver feet
  In frantic melody!





XI.

If the foolish call them 'flowers,'
  Need the wiser tell?
If the savans 'classify' them,
  It is just as well!

Those who read the Revelations
  Must not criticise
Those who read the same edition
  With beclouded eyes!

Could we stand with that old Moses
  Canaan denied, --
Scan, like him, the stately landscape
  On the other side, --

Doubtless we should deem superfluous
  Many sciences
Not pursued by learnèd angels
  In scholastic skies!

Low amid that glad _Belles lettres_
  Grant that we may stand,
Stars, amid profound Galaxies,
  At that grand 'Right hand'!





XII.

A SYLLABLE.

Could mortal lip divine
  The undeveloped freight
Of a delivered syllable,
  'T would crumble with the weight.





XIII.

PARTING.

My life closed twice before its close;
  It yet remains to see
If Immortality unveil
  A third event to me,

So huge, so hopeless to conceive,
  As these that twice befell.
Parting is all we know of heaven,
  And all we need of hell.





XIV.

ASPIRATION.

We never know how high we are
  Till we are called to rise;
And then, if we are true to plan,
  Our statures touch the skies.

The heroism we recite
  Would be a daily thing,
Did not ourselves the cubits warp
  For fear to be a king.





XV.

THE INEVITABLE.

While I was fearing it, it came,
  But came with less of fear,
Because that fearing it so long
  Had almost made it dear.
There is a fitting a dismay,
  A fitting a despair.
'Tis harder knowing it is due,
  Than knowing it is here.
The trying on the utmost,
  The morning it is new,
Is terribler than wearing it
  A whole existence through.





XVI.

A BOOK.

There is no frigate like a book
  To take us lands away,
Nor any coursers like a page
  Of prancing poetry.
This traverse may the poorest take
  Without oppress of toll;
How frugal is the chariot
  That bears a human soul!





XVII.

Who has not found the heaven below
  Will fail of it above.
God's residence is next to mine,
  His furniture is love.





XVIII.

A PORTRAIT.

A face devoid of love or grace,
  A hateful, hard, successful face,
A face with which a stone
  Would feel as thoroughly at ease
As were they old acquaintances, --
  First time together thrown.





XIX.

I HAD A GUINEA GOLDEN.

I had a guinea golden;
  I lost it in the sand,
And though the sum was simple,
  And pounds were in the land,
Still had it such a value
  Unto my frugal eye,
That when I could not find it
  I sat me down to sigh.

I had a crimson robin
  Who sang full many a day,
But when the woods were painted
  He, too, did fly away.
Time brought me other robins, --
  Their ballads were the same, --
Still for my missing troubadour
  I kept the 'house at hame.'

I had a star in heaven;
  One Pleiad was its name,
And when I was not heeding
  It wandered from the same.
And though the skies are crowded,
  And all the night ashine,
I do not care about it,
  Since none of them are mine.

My story has a moral:
  I have a missing friend, --
Pleiad its name, and robin,
  And guinea in the sand, --
And when this mournful ditty,
  Accompanied with tear,
Shall meet the eye of traitor
  In country far from here,
Grant that repentance solemn
  May seize upon his mind,
And he no consolation
  Beneath the sun may find.

NOTE. -- This poem may have had, like many others, a
personal origin. It is more than probable that it was
sent to some friend travelling in Europe, a dainty
reminder of letter-writing delinquencies.





XX.

SATURDAY AFTERNOON.

From all the jails the boys and girls
  Ecstatically leap, --
Beloved, only afternoon
  That prison doesn't keep.

They storm the earth and stun the air,
  A mob of solid bliss.
Alas! that frowns could lie in wait
  For such a foe as this!






XXI.

Few get enough, -- enough is one;
  To that ethereal throng
Have not each one of us the right
  To stealthily belong?





XXII.

Upon the gallows hung a wretch,
  Too sullied for the hell
To which the law entitled him.
  As nature's curtain fell
The one who bore him tottered in,
  For this was woman's son.
''T was all I had,' she stricken gasped;
  Oh, what a livid boon!





XXIII.

THE LOST THOUGHT.

I felt a clearing in my mind
  As if my brain had split;
I tried to match it, seam by seam,
  But could not make them fit.

The thought behind I strove to join
  Unto the thought before,
But sequence ravelled out of reach
  Like balls upon a floor.





XXIV.

RETICENCE.

The reticent volcano keeps
  His never slumbering plan;
Confided are his projects pink
  To no precarious man.

If nature will not tell the tale
  Jehovah told to her,
Can human nature not survive
  Without a listener?

Admonished by her buckled lips
  Let every babbler be.
The only secret people keep
  Is Immortality.





XXV.

WITH FLOWERS.

If recollecting were forgetting,
  Then I remember not;
And if forgetting, recollecting,
  How near I had forgot!
And if to miss were merry,
  And if to mourn were gay,
How very blithe the fingers
  That gathered these to-day!





XXVI.

The farthest thunder that I heard
  Was nearer than the sky,
And rumbles still, though torrid noons
  Have lain their missiles by.
The lightning that preceded it
  Struck no one but myself,
But I would not exchange the bolt
  For all the rest of life.
Indebtedness to oxygen
  The chemist may repay,
But not the obligation
  To electricity.
It founds the homes and decks the days,
  And every clamor bright
Is but the gleam concomitant
  Of that waylaying light.
The thought is quiet as a flake, --
  A crash without a sound;
How life's reverberation
  Its explanation found!





XXVII.

On the bleakness of my lot
  Bloom I strove to raise.
Late, my acre of a rock
  Yielded grape and maize.

Soil of flint if steadfast tilled
  Will reward the hand;
Seed of palm by Lybian sun
  Fructified in sand.





XXVIII.

CONTRAST.

A door just opened on a street --
  I, lost, was passing by --
An instant's width of warmth disclosed,
  And wealth, and company.

The door as sudden shut, and I,
  I, lost, was passing by, --
Lost doubly, but by contrast most,
  Enlightening misery.






XXIX.

FRIENDS.

Are friends delight or pain?
  Could bounty but remain
Riches were good.

But if they only stay
Bolder to fly away,
  Riches are sad.






XXX.

FIRE.

Ashes denote that fire was;
  Respect the grayest pile
For the departed creature's sake
  That hovered there awhile.

Fire exists the first in light,
  And then consolidates, --
Only the chemist can disclose
  Into what carbonates.





XXXI.

A MAN.

Fate slew him, but he did not drop;
  She felled -- he did not fall --
Impaled him on her fiercest stakes --
  He neutralized them all.

She stung him, sapped his firm advance,
  But, when her worst was done,
And he, unmoved, regarded her,
  Acknowledged him a man.





XXXII.

VENTURES.

Finite to fail, but infinite to venture.
  For the one ship that struts the shore
Many's the gallant, overwhelmed creature
  Nodding in navies nevermore.





XXXIII.

GRIEFS.

I measure every grief I meet
  With analytic eyes;
I wonder if it weighs like mine,
  Or has an easier size.

I wonder if they bore it long,
  Or did it just begin?
I could not tell the date of mine,
  It feels so old a pain.

I wonder if it hurts to live,
  And if they have to try,
And whether, could they choose between,
  They would not rather die.

I wonder if when years have piled --
  Some thousands -- on the cause
Of early hurt, if such a lapse
  Could give them any pause;

Or would they go on aching still
  Through centuries above,
Enlightened to a larger pain
  By contrast with the love.

The grieved are many, I am told;
  The reason deeper lies, --
Death is but one and comes but once,
  And only nails the eyes.

There's grief of want, and grief of cold, --
  A sort they call 'despair;'
There's banishment from native eyes,
  In sight of native air.

And though I may not guess the kind
  Correctly, yet to me
A piercing comfort it affords
  In passing Calvary,

To note the fashions of the cross,
  Of those that stand alone,
Still fascinated to presume
  That some are like my own.





XXXIV.

I have a king who does not speak;
So, wondering, thro' the hours meek
  I trudge the day away,--
Half glad when it is night and sleep,
If, haply, thro' a dream to peep
  In parlors shut by day.

And if I do, when morning comes,
It is as if a hundred drums
  Did round my pillow roll,
And shouts fill all my childish sky,
And bells keep saying 'victory'
  From steeples in my soul!

And if I don't, the little Bird
Within the Orchard is not heard,
  And I omit to pray,
'Father, thy will be done' to-day,
For my will goes the other way,
  And it were perjury!





XXXV.

DISENCHANTMENT.

It dropped so low in my regard
  I heard it hit the ground,
And go to pieces on the stones
  At bottom of my mind;

Yet blamed the fate that fractured, less
  Than I reviled myself
For entertaining plated wares
  Upon my silver shelf.





XXXVI.

LOST FAITH.

To lose one's faith surpasses
  The loss of an estate,
Because estates can be
  Replenished, -- faith cannot.

Inherited with life,
  Belief but once can be;
Annihilate a single clause,
  And Being's beggary.





XXXVII.

LOST JOY.

I had a daily bliss
  I half indifferent viewed,
Till sudden I perceived it stir, --
  It grew as I pursued,

Till when, around a crag,
  It wasted from my sight,
Enlarged beyond my utmost scope,
  I learned its sweetness right.





XXXVIII.

I worked for chaff, and earning wheat
  Was haughty and betrayed.
What right had fields to arbitrate
  In matters ratified?

I tasted wheat, -- and hated chaff,
  And thanked the ample friend;
Wisdom is more becoming viewed
  At distance than at hand.





XXXIX.

Life, and Death, and Giants
  Such as these, are still.
Minor apparatus, hopper of the mill,
Beetle at the candle,
  Or a fife's small fame,
Maintain by accident
  That they proclaim.





XL.

ALPINE GLOW.

Our lives are Swiss, --
  So still, so cool,
  Till, some odd afternoon,
The Alps neglect their curtains,
  And we look farther on.

Italy stands the other side,
  While, like a guard between,
The solemn Alps,
The siren Alps,
  Forever intervene!





XLI.

REMEMBRANCE.

Remembrance has a rear and front, --
  'T is something like a house;
It has a garret also
  For refuse and the mouse,

Besides, the deepest cellar
  That ever mason hewed;
Look to it, by its fathoms
  Ourselves be not pursued.





XLII.

To hang our head ostensibly,
  And subsequent to find
That such was not the posture
  Of our immortal mind,

Affords the sly presumption
  That, in so dense a fuzz,
You, too, take cobweb attitudes
  Upon a plane of gauze!





XLIII.

THE BRAIN.

The brain is wider than the sky,
  For, put them side by side,
The one the other will include
  With ease, and you beside.

The brain is deeper than the sea,
  For, hold them, blue to blue,
The one the other will absorb,
  As sponges, buckets do.

The brain is just the weight of God,
  For, lift them, pound for pound,
And they will differ, if they do,
  As syllable from sound.





XLIV.

The bone that has no marrow;
  What ultimate for that?
It is not fit for table,
  For beggar, or for cat.

A bone has obligations,
  A being has the same;
A marrowless assembly
  Is culpabler than shame.

But how shall finished creatures
  A function fresh obtain? --
Old Nicodemus' phantom
  Confronting us again!





XLV.

THE PAST.

The past is such a curious creature,
  To look her in the face
A transport may reward us,
  Or a disgrace.

Unarmed if any meet her,
  I charge him, fly!
Her rusty ammunition
  Might yet reply!





XLVI.

To help our bleaker parts
  Salubrious hours are given,
Which if they do not fit for earth
  Drill silently for heaven.





XLVII.

What soft, cherubic creatures
  These gentlewomen are!
One would as soon assault a plush
  Or violate a star.

Such dimity convictions,
  A horror so refined
Of freckled human nature,
  Of Deity ashamed, --

It's such a common glory,
  A fisherman's degree!
Redemption, brittle lady,
  Be so, ashamed of thee.





XLVIII.

DESIRE.

Who never wanted, -- maddest joy
  Remains to him unknown:
The banquet of abstemiousness
  Surpasses that of wine.

Within its hope, though yet ungrasped
  Desire's perfect goal,
No nearer, lest reality
  Should disenthrall thy soul.





XLIX.

PHILOSOPHY.

It might be easier
  To fail with land in sight,
Than gain my blue peninsula
  To perish of delight.





L.

POWER.

You cannot put a fire out;
  A thing that can ignite
Can go, itself, without a fan
  Upon the slowest night.

You cannot fold a flood
  And put it in a drawer, --
Because the winds would find it out,
  And tell your cedar floor.





LI.

A modest lot, a fame petite,
  A brief campaign of sting and sweet
  Is plenty! Is enough!
A sailor's business is the shore,
  A soldier's -- balls. Who asketh more
Must seek the neighboring life!





LII.

Is bliss, then, such abyss
I must not put my foot amiss
For fear I spoil my shoe?

I'd rather suit my foot
Than save my boot,
For yet to buy another pair
Is possible
At any fair.

But bliss is sold just once;
The patent lost
None buy it any more.





LIII.

EXPERIENCE.

I stepped from plank to plank
  So slow and cautiously;
The stars about my head I felt,
  About my feet the sea.

I knew not but the next
  Would be my final inch, --
This gave me that precarious gait
  Some call experience.





LIV.

THANKSGIVING DAY.

One day is there of the series
  Termed Thanksgiving day,
Celebrated part at table,
  Part in memory.

Neither patriarch nor pussy,
  I dissect the play;
Seems it, to my hooded thinking,
  Reflex holiday.

Had there been no sharp subtraction
  From the early sum,
Not an acre or a caption
  Where was once a room,

Not a mention, whose small pebble
  Wrinkled any bay, --
Unto such, were such assembly,
  'T were Thanksgiving day.





LV.

CHILDISH GRIEFS.

Softened by Time's consummate plush,
  How sleek the woe appears
That threatened childhood's citadel
  And undermined the years!

Bisected now by bleaker griefs,
  We envy the despair
That devastated childhood's realm,
  So easy to repair.






II. LOVE.


I.

CONSECRATION.

Proud of my broken heart since thou didst break it,
  Proud of the pain I did not feel till thee,
Proud of my night since thou with moons dost slake it,
  Not to partake thy passion, my humility.





II.

LOVE'S HUMILITY.

My worthiness is all my doubt,
  His merit all my fear,
Contrasting which, my qualities
  Do lowlier appear;

Lest I should insufficient prove
  For his beloved need,
The chiefest apprehension
  Within my loving creed.

So I, the undivine abode
  Of his elect content,
Conform my soul as 't were a church
  Unto her sacrament.





III.

LOVE.

Love is anterior to life,
  Posterior to death,
Initial of creation, and
  The exponent of breath.





IV.

SATISFIED.

One blessing had I, than the rest
  So larger to my eyes
That I stopped gauging, satisfied,
  For this enchanted size.

It was the limit of my dream,
  The focus of my prayer, --
A perfect, paralyzing bliss
  Contented as despair.

I knew no more of want or cold,
  Phantasms both become,
For this new value in the soul,
  Supremest earthly sum.

The heaven below the heaven above
  Obscured with ruddier hue.
Life's latitude leant over-full;
  The judgment perished, too.

Why joys so scantily disburse,
  Why Paradise defer,
Why floods are served to us in bowls, --
  I speculate no more.





V.

WITH A FLOWER.

When roses cease to bloom, dear,
  And violets are done,
When bumble-bees in solemn flight
  Have passed beyond the sun,

The hand that paused to gather
  Upon this summer's day
Will idle lie, in Auburn, --
  Then take my flower, pray!





VI.

SONG.

Summer for thee grant I may be
  When summer days are flown!
Thy music still when whippoorwill
  And oriole are done!

For thee to bloom, I'll skip the tomb
  And sow my blossoms o'er!
Pray gather me, Anemone,
  Thy flower forevermore!





VII.

LOYALTY.

Split the lark and you'll find the music,
  Bulb after bulb, in silver rolled,
Scantily dealt to the summer morning,
  Saved for your ear when lutes be old.

Loose the flood, you shall find it patent,
  Gush after gush, reserved for you;
Scarlet experiment! sceptic Thomas,
  Now, do you doubt that your bird was true?





VIII.

To lose thee, sweeter than to gain
  All other hearts I knew.
'T is true the drought is destitute,
  But then I had the dew!

The Caspian has its realms of sand,
  Its other realm of sea;
Without the sterile perquisite
  No Caspian could be.





IX.

  Poor little heart!
  Did they forget thee?
Then dinna care! Then dinna care!

  Proud little heart!
  Did they forsake thee?
Be debonair! Be debonair!

  Frail little heart!
  I would not break thee:
Could'st credit me? Could'st credit me?

  Gay little heart!
  Like morning glory
Thou'll wilted be; thou'll wilted be!





X.

FORGOTTEN.

There is a word
  Which bears a sword
  Can pierce an armed man.
It hurls its barbed syllables,--
  At once is mute again.
But where it fell
The saved will tell
  On patriotic day,
Some epauletted brother
  Gave his breath away.

Wherever runs the breathless sun,
  Wherever roams the day,
There is its noiseless onset,
  There is its victory!

Behold the keenest marksman!
  The most accomplished shot!
Time's sublimest target
  Is a soul 'forgot'!





XI.

I've got an arrow here;
  Loving the hand that sent it,
I the dart revere.

Fell, they will say, in 'skirmish'!
  Vanquished, my soul will know,
By but a simple arrow
  Sped by an archer's bow.





XII.

THE MASTER.

He fumbles at your spirit
  As players at the keys
Before they drop full music on;
  He stuns you by degrees,

Prepares your brittle substance
  For the ethereal blow,
By fainter hammers, further heard,
  Then nearer, then so slow

Your breath has time to straighten,
  Your brain to bubble cool, --
Deals one imperial thunderbolt
  That scalps your naked soul.





XIII.

Heart, we will forget him!
  You and I, to-night!
You may forget the warmth he gave,
  I will forget the light.

When you have done, pray tell me,
  That I my thoughts may dim;
Haste! lest while you're lagging,
  I may remember him!





XIV.

Father, I bring thee not myself, --
  That were the little load;
I bring thee the imperial heart
  I had not strength to hold.

The heart I cherished in my own
  Till mine too heavy grew,
Yet strangest, heavier since it went,
  Is it too large for you?





XV.

We outgrow love like other things
  And put it in the drawer,
Till it an antique fashion shows
  Like costumes grandsires wore.





XVI.

Not with a club the heart is broken,
    Nor with a stone;
A whip, so small you could not see it.
    I've known

To lash the magic creature
    Till it fell,
Yet that whip's name too noble
    Then to tell.

Magnanimous of bird
    By boy descried,
To sing unto the stone
    Of which it died.





XVII.

WHO?

My friend must be a bird,
    Because it flies!
Mortal my friend must be,
    Because it dies!
Barbs has it, like a bee.
Ah, curious friend,
    Thou puzzlest me!





XVIII.

He touched me, so I live to know
That such a day, permitted so,
  I groped upon his breast.
It was a boundless place to me,
And silenced, as the awful sea
  Puts minor streams to rest.

And now, I'm different from before,
As if I breathed superior air,
  Or brushed a royal gown;
My feet, too, that had wandered so,
My gypsy face transfigured now
  To tenderer renown.





XIX.

DREAMS.

Let me not mar that perfect dream
  By an auroral stain,
But so adjust my daily night
  That it will come again.





XX.

NUMEN LUMEN.

I live with him, I see his face;
  I go no more away
For visitor, or sundown;
  Death's single privacy,

The only one forestalling mine,
  And that by right that he
Presents a claim invisible,
  No wedlock granted me.

I live with him, I hear his voice,
  I stand alive to-day
To witness to the certainty
  Of immortality

Taught me by Time, -- the lower way,
  Conviction every day, --
That life like this is endless,
  Be judgment what it may.





XXI.

LONGING.

I envy seas whereon he rides,
  I envy spokes of wheels
Of chariots that him convey,
  I envy speechless hills

That gaze upon his journey;
  How easy all can see
What is forbidden utterly
  As heaven, unto me!

I envy nests of sparrows
  That dot his distant eaves,
The wealthy fly upon his pane,
  The happy, happy leaves

That just abroad his window
  Have summer's leave to be,
The earrings of Pizarro
  Could not obtain for me.

I envy light that wakes him,
  And bells that boldly ring
To tell him it is noon abroad, --
  Myself his noon could bring,

Yet interdict my blossom
  And abrogate my bee,
Lest noon in everlasting night
  Drop Gabriel and me.





XXII.

WEDDED.

A solemn thing it was, I said,
  A woman white to be,
And wear, if God should count me fit,
  Her hallowed mystery.

A timid thing to drop a life
  Into the purple well,
Too plummetless that it come back
  Eternity until.









III. NATURE.


I.

NATURE'S CHANGES.

The springtime's pallid landscape
  Will glow like bright bouquet,
Though drifted deep in parian
  The village lies to-day.

The lilacs, bending many a year,
  With purple load will hang;
The bees will not forget the tune
  Their old forefathers sang.

The rose will redden in the bog,
  The aster on the hill
Her everlasting fashion set,
  And covenant gentians frill,

Till summer folds her miracle
  As women do their gown,
Or priests adjust the symbols
  When sacrament is done.





II.

THE TULIP.

She slept beneath a tree
  Remembered but by me.
I touched her cradle mute;
She recognized the foot,
Put on her carmine suit, --
  And see!





III.

A light exists in spring
  Not present on the year
At any other period.
  When March is scarcely here

A color stands abroad
  On solitary hills
That science cannot overtake,
  But human nature feels.

It waits upon the lawn;
  It shows the furthest tree
Upon the furthest slope we know;
  It almost speaks to me.

Then, as horizons step,
  Or noons report away,
Without the formula of sound,
  It passes, and we stay:

A quality of loss
  Affecting our content,
As trade had suddenly encroached
  Upon a sacrament.





IV.

THE WAKING YEAR.

A lady red upon the hill
  Her annual secret keeps;
A lady white within the field
  In placid lily sleeps!

The tidy breezes with their brooms
  Sweep vale, and hill, and tree!
Prithee, my pretty housewives!
  Who may expected be?

The neighbors do not yet suspect!
  The woods exchange a smile --
Orchard, and buttercup, and bird --
  In such a little while!

And yet how still the landscape stands,
  How nonchalant the wood,
As if the resurrection
  Were nothing very odd!





V.

TO MARCH.

Dear March, come in!
How glad I am!
I looked for you before.
Put down your hat --
You must have walked --
How out of breath you are!
Dear March, how are you?
And the rest?
Did you leave Nature well?
Oh, March, come right upstairs with me,
I have so much to tell!

I got your letter, and the birds';
The maples never knew
That you were coming, -- I declare,
How red their faces grew!
But, March, forgive me --
And all those hills
You left for me to hue;
There was no purple suitable,
You took it all with you.

Who knocks? That April!
Lock the door!
I will not be pursued!
He stayed away a year, to call
When I am occupied.
But trifles look so trivial
As soon as you have come,
That blame is just as dear as praise
And praise as mere as blame.





VI.

MARCH.

We like March, his shoes are purple,
  He is new and high;
Makes he mud for dog and peddler,
  Makes he forest dry;
Knows the adder's tongue his coming,
  And begets her spot.
Stands the sun so close and mighty
  That our minds are hot.
News is he of all the others;
  Bold it were to die
With the blue-birds buccaneering
  On his British sky.




VII.

DAWN.

Not knowing when the dawn will come
  I open every door;
Or has it feathers like a bird,
  Or billows like a shore?





VIII.

A murmur in the trees to note,
  Not loud enough for wind;
A star not far enough to seek,
  Nor near enough to find;

A long, long yellow on the lawn,
  A hubbub as of feet;
Not audible, as ours to us,
  But dapperer, more sweet;

A hurrying home of little men
  To houses unperceived, --
All this, and more, if I should tell,
  Would never be believed.

Of robins in the trundle bed
  How many I espy
Whose nightgowns could not hide the wings,
  Although I heard them try!

But then I promised ne'er to tell;
  How could I break my word?
So go your way and I'll go mine, --
  No fear you'll miss the road.





IX.

Morning is the place for dew,
  Corn is made at noon,
After dinner light for flowers,
  Dukes for setting sun!





X.

To my quick ear the leaves conferred;
  The bushes they were bells;
I could not find a privacy
  From Nature's sentinels.

In cave if I presumed to hide,
  The walls began to tell;
Creation seemed a mighty crack
  To make me visible.





XI.

A ROSE.

A sepal, petal, and a thorn
  Upon a common summer's morn,
A flash of dew, a bee or two,
A breeze
A caper in the trees, --
  And I'm a rose!





XII.

High from the earth I heard a bird;
  He trod upon the trees
As he esteemed them trifles,
  And then he spied a breeze,
And situated softly
  Upon a pile of wind
Which in a perturbation
  Nature had left behind.
A joyous-going fellow
  I gathered from his talk,
Which both of benediction
  And badinage partook,
Without apparent burden,
  I learned, in leafy wood
He was the faithful father
  Of a dependent brood;
And this untoward transport
  His remedy for care, --
A contrast to our respites.
  How different we are!





XIII.

COBWEBS.

The spider as an artist
  Has never been employed
Though his surpassing merit
  Is freely certified

By every broom and Bridget
  Throughout a Christian land.
Neglected son of genius,
  I take thee by the hand.





XIV.

A WELL.

What mystery pervades a well!
  The water lives so far,
Like neighbor from another world
  Residing in a jar.

The grass does not appear afraid;
  I often wonder he
Can stand so close and look so bold
  At what is dread to me.

Related somehow they may be, --
  The sedge stands next the sea,
Where he is floorless, yet of fear
  No evidence gives he.

But nature is a stranger yet;
  The ones that cite her most
Have never passed her haunted house,
  Nor simplified her ghost.

To pity those that know her not
  Is helped by the regret
That those who know her, know her less
  The nearer her they get.





XV.

To make a prairie it takes a clover and one bee, --
One clover, and a bee,
And revery.
The revery alone will do
If bees are few.





XVI.

THE WIND.

It's like the light, --
  A fashionless delight
It's like the bee, --
  A dateless melody.

It's like the woods,
  Private like breeze,
Phraseless, yet it stirs
  The proudest trees.

It's like the morning, --
  Best when it's done, --
The everlasting clocks
  Chime noon.





XVII.

A dew sufficed itself
  And satisfied a leaf,
And felt, 'how vast a destiny!
  How trivial is life!'

The sun went out to work,
  The day went out to play,
But not again that dew was seen
  By physiognomy.

Whether by day abducted,
  Or emptied by the sun
Into the sea, in passing,
  Eternally unknown.





XVIII.

THE WOODPECKER.

His bill an auger is,
  His head, a cap and frill.
He laboreth at every tree, --
  A worm his utmost goal.





XIX.

A SNAKE.

Sweet is the swamp with its secrets,
  Until we meet a snake;
'T is then we sigh for houses,
  And our departure take
At that enthralling gallop
  That only childhood knows.
A snake is summer's treason,
  And guile is where it goes.





XX.

Could I but ride indefinite,
  As doth the meadow-bee,
And visit only where I liked,
  And no man visit me,

And flirt all day with buttercups,
  And marry whom I may,
And dwell a little everywhere,
  Or better, run away

With no police to follow,
  Or chase me if I do,
Till I should jump peninsulas
  To get away from you, --

I said, but just to be a bee
  Upon a raft of air,
And row in nowhere all day long,
  And anchor off the bar,--
What liberty! So captives deem
  Who tight in dungeons are.





XXI.

THE MOON.

The moon was but a chin of gold
  A night or two ago,
And now she turns her perfect face
  Upon the world below.

Her forehead is of amplest blond;
  Her cheek like beryl stone;
Her eye unto the summer dew
  The likest I have known.

Her lips of amber never part;
  But what must be the smile
Upon her friend she could bestow
  Were such her silver will!

And what a privilege to be
  But the remotest star!
For certainly her way might pass
  Beside your twinkling door.

Her bonnet is the firmament,
  The universe her shoe,
The stars the trinkets at her belt,
  Her dimities of blue.





XXII.

THE BAT.

The bat is dun with wrinkled wings
  Like fallow article,
And not a song pervades his lips,
  Or none perceptible.

His small umbrella, quaintly halved,
  Describing in the air
An arc alike inscrutable, --
  Elate philosopher!

Deputed from what firmament
  Of what astute abode,
Empowered with what malevolence
  Auspiciously withheld.

To his adroit Creator
  Ascribe no less the praise;
Beneficent, believe me,
  His eccentricities.





XXIII.

THE BALLOON.

You've seen balloons set, haven't you?
  So stately they ascend
It is as swans discarded you
  For duties diamond.

Their liquid feet go softly out
  Upon a sea of blond;
They spurn the air as 't were too mean
  For creatures so renowned.

Their ribbons just beyond the eye,
  They struggle some for breath,
And yet the crowd applauds below;
  They would not encore death.

The gilded creature strains and spins,
  Trips frantic in a tree,
Tears open her imperial veins
  And tumbles in the sea.

The crowd retire with an oath
  The dust in streets goes down,
And clerks in counting-rooms observe,
  ''T was only a balloon.'





XXIV.

EVENING.

The cricket sang,
And set the sun,
And workmen finished, one by one,
  Their seam the day upon.

The low grass loaded with the dew,
The twilight stood as strangers do
With hat in hand, polite and new,
  To stay as if, or go.

A vastness, as a neighbor, came, --
A wisdom without face or name,
A peace, as hemispheres at home, --
  And so the night became.





XXV.

COCOON.

Drab habitation of whom?
Tabernacle or tomb,
Or dome of worm,
Or porch of gnome,
Or some elf's catacomb?




XXVI.

SUNSET.

A sloop of amber slips away
  Upon an ether sea,
And wrecks in peace a purple tar,
  The son of ecstasy.





XXVII.

AURORA.

Of bronze and blaze
  The north, to-night!
  So adequate its forms,
So preconcerted with itself,
  So distant to alarms, --
An unconcern so sovereign
  To universe, or me,
It paints my simple spirit
  With tints of majesty,
Till I take vaster attitudes,
  And strut upon my stem,
Disdaining men and oxygen,
  For arrogance of them.

My splendors are menagerie;
  But their competeless show
Will entertain the centuries
  When I am, long ago,
An island in dishonored grass,
  Whom none but daisies know.





XXVIII.

THE COMING OF NIGHT.

How the old mountains drip with sunset,
  And the brake of dun!
How the hemlocks are tipped in tinsel
  By the wizard sun!

How the old steeples hand the scarlet,
  Till the ball is full, --
Have I the lip of the flamingo
  That I dare to tell?

Then, how the fire ebbs like billows,
  Touching all the grass
With a departing, sapphire feature,
  As if a duchess pass!

How a small dusk crawls on the village
  Till the houses blot;
And the odd flambeaux no men carry
  Glimmer on the spot!

Now it is night in nest and kennel,
  And where was the wood,
Just a dome of abyss is nodding
  Into solitude! --

These are the visions baffled Guido;
  Titian never told;
Domenichino dropped the pencil,
  Powerless to unfold.





XXIX.

AFTERMATH.

The murmuring of bees has ceased;
  But murmuring of some
Posterior, prophetic,
  Has simultaneous come, --

The lower metres of the year,
  When nature's laugh is done, --
The Revelations of the book
  Whose Genesis is June.






IV. TIME AND ETERNITY.

I.

This world is not conclusion;
  A sequel stands beyond,
Invisible, as music,
  But positive, as sound.
It beckons and it baffles;
  Philosophies don't know,
And through a riddle, at the last,
  Sagacity must go.
To guess it puzzles scholars;
  To gain it, men have shown
Contempt of generations,
  And crucifixion known.





II.

We learn in the retreating
  How vast an one
Was recently among us.
  A perished sun

Endears in the departure
  How doubly more
Than all the golden presence
  It was before!





III.

They say that 'time assuages,' --
  Time never did assuage;
An actual suffering strengthens,
  As sinews do, with age.

Time is a test of trouble,
  But not a remedy.
If such it prove, it prove too
  There was no malady.





IV.

We cover thee, sweet face.
  Not that we tire of thee,
But that thyself fatigue of us;
  Remember, as thou flee,
We follow thee until
  Thou notice us no more,
And then, reluctant, turn away
  To con thee o'er and o'er,
And blame the scanty love
  We were content to show,
Augmented, sweet, a hundred fold
  If thou would'st take it now.





V.

ENDING.

That is solemn we have ended, --
  Be it but a play,
Or a glee among the garrets,
  Or a holiday,

Or a leaving home; or later,
  Parting with a world
We have understood, for better
  Still it be unfurled.





VI.

The stimulus, beyond the grave
  His countenance to see,
Supports me like imperial drams
  Afforded royally.





VII.

Given in marriage unto thee,
  Oh, thou celestial host!
Bride of the Father and the Son,
  Bride of the Holy Ghost!

Other betrothal shall dissolve,
  Wedlock of will decay;
Only the keeper of this seal
  Conquers mortality.






VIII.

That such have died enables us
  The tranquiller to die;
That such have lived, certificate
  For immortality.





IX.

They won't frown always, -- some sweet day
  When I forget to tease,
They'll recollect how cold I looked,
  And how I just said 'please.'

Then they will hasten to the door
  To call the little child,
Who cannot thank them, for the ice
  That on her lisping piled.





X.

IMMORTALITY.

It is an honorable thought,
  And makes one lift one's hat,
As one encountered gentlefolk
  Upon a daily street,

That we've immortal place,
  Though pyramids decay,
And kingdoms, like the orchard,
  Flit russetly away.





XI.

The distance that the dead have gone
  Does not at first appear;
Their coming back seems possible
  For many an ardent year.

And then, that we have followed them
  We more than half suspect,
So intimate have we become
  With their dear retrospect.





XII.

How dare the robins sing,
  When men and women hear
Who since they went to their account
  Have settled with the year! --
Paid all that life had earned
  In one consummate bill,
And now, what life or death can do
  Is immaterial.
Insulting is the sun
  To him whose mortal light,
Beguiled of immortality,
  Bequeaths him to the night.
In deference to him
  Extinct be every hum,
Whose garden wrestles with the dew,
  At daybreak overcome!





XIII.

DEATH.

Death is like the insect
  Menacing the tree,
Competent to kill it,
  But decoyed may be.

Bait it with the balsam,
  Seek it with the knife,
Baffle, if it cost you
  Everything in life.

Then, if it have burrowed
  Out of reach of skill,
Ring the tree and leave it, --
  'T is the vermin's will.





XIV.

UNWARNED.

'T is sunrise, little maid, hast thou
  No station in the day?
'T was not thy wont to hinder so, --
  Retrieve thine industry.

'T is noon, my little maid, alas!
  And art thou sleeping yet?
The lily waiting to be wed,
  The bee, dost thou forget?

My little maid, 't is night; alas,
  That night should be to thee
Instead of morning! Hadst thou broached
  Thy little plan to me,
Dissuade thee if I could not, sweet,
  I might have aided thee.





XV.

Each that we lose takes part of us;
  A crescent still abides,
Which like the moon, some turbid night,
  Is summoned by the tides.





XVI.

Not any higher stands the grave
  For heroes than for men;
Not any nearer for the child
  Than numb three-score and ten.

This latest leisure equal lulls
  The beggar and his queen;
Propitiate this democrat
  By summer's gracious mien.





XVII.

ASLEEP.

As far from pity as complaint,
  As cool to speech as stone,
As numb to revelation
  As if my trade were bone.

As far from time as history,
  As near yourself to-day
As children to the rainbow's scarf,
  Or sunset's yellow play

To eyelids in the sepulchre.
  How still the dancer lies,
While color's revelations break,
  And blaze the butterflies!





XVIII.

THE SPIRIT.

'T is whiter than an Indian pipe,
  'T is dimmer than a lace;
No stature has it, like a fog,
  When you approach the place.

Not any voice denotes it here,
  Or intimates it there;
A spirit, how doth it accost?
  What customs hath the air?

This limitless hyperbole
  Each one of us shall be;
'T is drama, if (hypothesis)
  It be not tragedy!





XIX.

THE MONUMENT.

She laid her docile crescent down,
  And this mechanic stone
Still states, to dates that have forgot,
  The news that she is gone.

So constant to its stolid trust,
  The shaft that never knew,
It shames the constancy that fled
  Before its emblem flew.





XX.

Bless God, he went as soldiers,
  His musket on his breast;
Grant, God, he charge the bravest
  Of all the martial blest.

Please God, might I behold him
  In epauletted white,
I should not fear the foe then,
  I should not fear the fight.





XXI.

Immortal is an ample word
  When what we need is by,
But when it leaves us for a time,
  'T is a necessity.

Of heaven above the firmest proof
  We fundamental know,
Except for its marauding hand,
  It had been heaven below.





XXII.

Where every bird is bold to go,
  And bees abashless play,
The foreigner before he knocks
  Must thrust the tears away.





XXIII.

The grave my little cottage is,
  Where, keeping house for thee,
I make my parlor orderly,
  And lay the marble tea,

For two divided, briefly,
  A cycle, it may be,
Till everlasting life unite
  In strong society.





XXIV.

This was in the white of the year,
  That was in the green,
Drifts were as difficult then to think
  As daisies now to be seen.

Looking back is best that is left,
  Or if it be before,
Retrospection is prospect's half,
  Sometimes almost more.





XXV.

Sweet hours have perished here;
  This is a mighty room;
Within its precincts hopes have played, --
  Now shadows in the tomb.





XXVI.

Me! Come! My dazzled face
In such a shining place!

Me! Hear! My foreign ear
The sounds of welcome near!

The saints shall meet
Our bashful feet.

My holiday shall be
That they remember me;

My paradise, the fame
That they pronounce my name.





XXVII.

INVISIBLE.

From us she wandered now a year,
  Her tarrying unknown;
If wilderness prevent her feet,
  Or that ethereal zone

No eye hath seen and lived,
  We ignorant must be.
We only know what time of year
  We took the mystery.






XXVIII.

I wish I knew that woman's name,
  So, when she comes this way,
To hold my life, and hold my ears,
  For fear I hear her say

She's 'sorry I am dead,' again,
  Just when the grave and I
Have sobbed ourselves almost to sleep, --
  Our only lullaby.





XXIX.

TRYING TO FORGET.

Bereaved of all, I went abroad,
  No less bereaved to be
Upon a new peninsula, --
  The grave preceded me,

Obtained my lodgings ere myself,
  And when I sought my bed,
The grave it was, reposed upon
  The pillow for my head.

I waked, to find it first awake,
  I rose, -- it followed me;
I tried to drop it in the crowd,
  To lose it in the sea,

In cups of artificial drowse
  To sleep its shape away, --
The grave was finished, but the spade
  Remained in memory.





XXX.

I felt a funeral in my brain,
  And mourners, to and fro,
Kept treading, treading, till it seemed
  That sense was breaking through.

And when they all were seated,
  A service like a drum
Kept beating, beating, till I thought
  My mind was going numb.

And then I heard them lift a box,
  And creak across my soul
With those same boots of lead, again.
  Then space began to toll

As all the heavens were a bell,
  And Being but an ear,
And I and silence some strange race,
  Wrecked, solitary, here.





XXXI.

I meant to find her when I came;
  Death had the same design;
But the success was his, it seems,
  And the discomfit mine.

I meant to tell her how I longed
  For just this single time;
But Death had told her so the first,
  And she had hearkened him.

To wander now is my abode;
  To rest, -- to rest would be
A privilege of hurricane
  To memory and me.





XXXII.

WAITING.

I sing to use the waiting,
  My bonnet but to tie,
And shut the door unto my house;
  No more to do have I,

Till, his best step approaching,
  We journey to the day,
And tell each other how we sang
  To keep the dark away.





XXXIII.

A sickness of this world it most occasions
  When best men die;
A wishfulness their far condition
  To occupy.

A chief indifference, as foreign
  A world must be
Themselves forsake contented,
  For Deity.





XXXIV.

Superfluous were the sun
  When excellence is dead;
He were superfluous every day,
  For every day is said

That syllable whose faith
  Just saves it from despair,
And whose 'I'll meet you' hesitates
  If love inquire, 'Where?'

Upon his dateless fame
  Our periods may lie,
As stars that drop anonymous
  From an abundant sky.





XXXV.

So proud she was to die
  It made us all ashamed
That what we cherished, so unknown
  To her desire seemed.

So satisfied to go
  Where none of us should be,
Immediately, that anguish stooped
  Almost to jealousy.





XXXVI.

FAREWELL.

Tie the strings to my life, my Lord,
  Then I am ready to go!
Just a look at the horses --
  Rapid! That will do!

Put me in on the firmest side,
  So I shall never fall;
For we must ride to the Judgment,
  And it's partly down hill.

But never I mind the bridges,
  And never I mind the sea;
Held fast in everlasting race
  By my own choice and thee.

Good-by to the life I used to live,
  And the world I used to know;
And kiss the hills for me, just once;
  Now I am ready to go!





XXXVII.

The dying need but little, dear, --
  A glass of water's all,
A flower's unobtrusive face
  To punctuate the wall,

A fan, perhaps, a friend's regret,
  And certainly that one
No color in the rainbow
  Perceives when you are gone.





XXXVIII.

DEAD.

There's something quieter than sleep
  Within this inner room!
It wears a sprig upon its breast,
  And will not tell its name.

Some touch it and some kiss it,
  Some chafe its idle hand;
It has a simple gravity
  I do not understand!

While simple-hearted neighbors
  Chat of the 'early dead,'
We, prone to periphrasis,
  Remark that birds have fled!





XXXIX.

The soul should always stand ajar,
  That if the heaven inquire,
He will not be obliged to wait,
  Or shy of troubling her.

Depart, before the host has slid
  The bolt upon the door,
To seek for the accomplished guest, --
  Her visitor no more.





XL.

Three weeks passed since I had seen her, --
  Some disease had vexed;
'T was with text and village singing
  I beheld her next,

And a company -- our pleasure
  To discourse alone;
Gracious now to me as any,
  Gracious unto none.

Borne, without dissent of either,
  To the parish night;
Of the separated people
  Which are out of sight?





XLI.

I breathed enough to learn the trick,
  And now, removed from air,
I simulate the breath so well,
  That one, to be quite sure

The lungs are stirless, must descend
  Among the cunning cells,
And touch the pantomime himself.
  How cool the bellows feels!





XLII.

I wonder if the sepulchre
  Is not a lonesome way,
When men and boys, and larks and June
  Go down the fields to hay!





XLIII.

JOY IN DEATH.

If tolling bell I ask the cause.
  'A soul has gone to God,'
I'm answered in a lonesome tone;
  Is heaven then so sad?

That bells should joyful ring to tell
  A soul had gone to heaven,
Would seem to me the proper way
  A good news should be given.





XLIV.

If I may have it when it's dead
  I will contented be;
If just as soon as breath is out
  It shall belong to me,

Until they lock it in the grave,
  'T is bliss I cannot weigh,
For though they lock thee in the grave,
  Myself can hold the key.

Think of it, lover! I and thee
  Permitted face to face to be;
After a life, a death we'll say, --
  For death was that, and this is thee.





XLV.

Before the ice is in the pools,
  Before the skaters go,
Or any cheek at nightfall
  Is tarnished by the snow,

Before the fields have finished,
  Before the Christmas tree,
Wonder upon wonder
  Will arrive to me!

What we touch the hems of
  On a summer's day;
What is only walking
  Just a bridge away;

That which sings so, speaks so,
  When there's no one here, --
Will the frock I wept in
  Answer me to wear?





XLVI.

DYING.

I heard a fly buzz when I died;
  The stillness round my form
Was like the stillness in the air
  Between the heaves of storm.

The eyes beside had wrung them dry,
  And breaths were gathering sure
For that last onset, when the king
  Be witnessed in his power.

I willed my keepsakes, signed away
  What portion of me I
Could make assignable, -- and then
  There interposed a fly,

With blue, uncertain, stumbling buzz,
  Between the light and me;
And then the windows failed, and then
  I could not see to see.





XLVII.

Adrift! A little boat adrift!
  And night is coming down!
Will no one guide a little boat
  Unto the nearest town?

So sailors say, on yesterday,
  Just as the dusk was brown,
One little boat gave up its strife,
  And gurgled down and down.

But angels say, on yesterday,
  Just as the dawn was red,
One little boat o'erspent with gales
Retrimmed its masts, redecked its sails
  Exultant, onward sped!





XLVIII.

There's been a death in the opposite house
  As lately as to-day.
I know it by the numb look
  Such houses have alway.

The neighbors rustle in and out,
  The doctor drives away.
A window opens like a pod,
  Abrupt, mechanically;

Somebody flings a mattress out, --
  The children hurry by;
They wonder if It died on that, --
  I used to when a boy.

The minister goes stiffly in
  As if the house were his,
And he owned all the mourners now,
  And little boys besides;

And then the milliner, and the man
  Of the appalling trade,
To take the measure of the house.
  There'll be that dark parade

Of tassels and of coaches soon;
  It's easy as a sign, --
The intuition of the news
  In just a country town.





XLIX.

We never know we go, -- when we are going
  We jest and shut the door;
Fate following behind us bolts it,
  And we accost no more.




L.

THE SOUL'S STORM.

It struck me every day
  The lightning was as new
As if the cloud that instant slit
  And let the fire through.

It burned me in the night,
  It blistered in my dream;
It sickened fresh upon my sight
  With every morning's beam.

I thought that storm was brief, --
  The maddest, quickest by;
But Nature lost the date of this,
  And left it in the sky.





LI.

Water is taught by thirst;
Land, by the oceans passed;
  Transport, by throe;
Peace, by its battles told;
Love, by memorial mould;
  Birds, by the snow.




LII.

THIRST.

We thirst at first, -- 't is Nature's act;
  And later, when we die,
A little water supplicate
  Of fingers going by.

It intimates the finer want,
  Whose adequate supply
Is that great water in the west
  Termed immortality.





LIII.

A clock stopped -- not the mantel's;
  Geneva's farthest skill
Can't put the puppet bowing
  That just now dangled still.

An awe came on the trinket!
  The figures hunched with pain,
Then quivered out of decimals
  Into degreeless noon.

It will not stir for doctors,
  This pendulum of snow;
The shopman importunes it,
  While cool, concernless No

Nods from the gilded pointers,
  Nods from the seconds slim,
Decades of arrogance between
  The dial life and him.





LIV.

CHARLOTTE BRONTË'S GRAVE.

All overgrown by cunning moss,
  All interspersed with weed,
The little cage of 'Currer Bell,'
  In quiet Haworth laid.

This bird, observing others,
  When frosts too sharp became,
Retire to other latitudes,
  Quietly did the same,

But differed in returning;
  Since Yorkshire hills are green,
Yet not in all the nests I meet
  Can nightingale be seen.

Gathered from many wanderings,
  Gethsemane can tell
Through what transporting anguish
  She reached the asphodel!

Soft fall the sounds of Eden
  Upon her puzzled ear;
Oh, what an afternoon for heaven,
  When 'Brontë' entered there!





LV.

A toad can die of light!
Death is the common right
  Of toads and men, --
Of earl and midge
The privilege.
  Why swagger then?
The gnat's supremacy
Is large as thine.





LVI.

Far from love the Heavenly Father
  Leads the chosen child;
Oftener through realm of briar
  Than the meadow mild,

Oftener by the claw of dragon
  Than the hand of friend,
Guides the little one predestined
  To the native land.





LVII.

SLEEPING.

A long, long sleep, a famous sleep
  That makes no show for dawn
By stretch of limb or stir of lid, --
  An independent one.

Was ever idleness like this?
  Within a hut of stone
To bask the centuries away
  Nor once look up for noon?





LVIII.

RETROSPECT.

'T was just this time last year I died.
  I know I heard the corn,
When I was carried by the farms, --
  It had the tassels on.

I thought how yellow it would look
  When Richard went to mill;
And then I wanted to get out,
  But something held my will.

I thought just how red apples wedged
  The stubble's joints between;
And carts went stooping round the fields
  To take the pumpkins in.

I wondered which would miss me least,
  And when Thanksgiving came,
If father'd multiply the plates
  To make an even sum.

And if my stocking hung too high,
  Would it blur the Christmas glee,
That not a Santa Claus could reach
  The altitude of me?

But this sort grieved myself, and so
  I thought how it would be
When just this time, some perfect year,
  Themselves should come to me.





LIX.

ETERNITY.

On this wondrous sea,
Sailing silently,
  Ho! pilot, ho!
Knowest thou the shore
Where no breakers roar,
  Where the storm is o'er?

In the silent west
Many sails at rest,
  Their anchors fast;
Thither I pilot thee, --
Land, ho! Eternity!
  Ashore at last!

TREES AND OTHER POEMS




The Twelve-Forty-Five

     (For Edward J. Wheeler)



     Within the Jersey City shed
     The engine coughs and shakes its head,
     The smoke, a plume of red and white,
     Waves madly in the face of night.
     And now the grave incurious stars
     Gleam on the groaning hurrying cars.
     Against the kind and awful reign
     Of darkness, this our angry train,
     A noisy little rebel, pouts
     Its brief defiance, flames and shouts --
     And passes on, and leaves no trace.
     For darkness holds its ancient place,
     Serene and absolute, the king
     Unchanged, of every living thing.
     The houses lie obscure and still
     In Rutherford and Carlton Hill.
     Our lamps intensify the dark
     Of slumbering Passaic Park.
     And quiet holds the weary feet
     That daily tramp through Prospect Street.
     What though we clang and clank and roar
     Through all Passaic's streets?  No door
     Will open, not an eye will see
     Who this loud vagabond may be.
     Upon my crimson cushioned seat,
     In manufactured light and heat,
     I feel unnatural and mean.
     Outside the towns are cool and clean;
     Curtained awhile from sound and sight
     They take God's gracious gift of night.
     The stars are watchful over them.
     On Clifton as on Bethlehem
     The angels, leaning down the sky,
     Shed peace and gentle dreams.  And I --
     I ride, I blasphemously ride
     Through all the silent countryside.
     The engine's shriek, the headlight's glare,
     Pollute the still nocturnal air.
     The cottages of Lake View sigh
     And sleeping, frown as we pass by.
     Why, even strident Paterson
     Rests quietly as any nun.
     Her foolish warring children keep
     The grateful armistice of sleep.
     For what tremendous errand's sake
     Are we so blatantly awake?
     What precious secret is our freight?
     What king must be abroad so late?
     Perhaps Death roams the hills to-night
     And we rush forth to give him fight.
     Or else, perhaps, we speed his way
     To some remote unthinking prey.
     Perhaps a woman writhes in pain
     And listens -- listens for the train!
     The train, that like an angel sings,
     The train, with healing on its wings.
     Now "Hawthorne!" the conductor cries.
     My neighbor starts and rubs his eyes.
     He hurries yawning through the car
     And steps out where the houses are.
     This is the reason of our quest!
     Not wantonly we break the rest
     Of town and village, nor do we
     Lightly profane night's sanctity.
     What Love commands the train fulfills,
     And beautiful upon the hills
     Are these our feet of burnished steel.
     Subtly and certainly I feel
     That Glen Rock welcomes us to her
     And silent Ridgewood seems to stir
     And smile, because she knows the train
     Has brought her children back again.
     We carry people home -- and so
     God speeds us, wheresoe'er we go.
     Hohokus, Waldwick, Allendale
     Lift sleepy heads to give us hail.
     In Ramsey, Mahwah, Suffern stand
     Houses that wistfully demand
     A father -- son -- some human thing
     That this, the midnight train, may bring.
     The trains that travel in the day
     They hurry folks to work or play.
     The midnight train is slow and old
     But of it let this thing be told,
     To its high honor be it said
     It carries people home to bed.
     My cottage lamp shines white and clear.
     God bless the train that brought me here.




Pennies



     A few long-hoarded pennies in his hand
     Behold him stand;
     A kilted Hedonist, perplexed and sad.
     The joy that once he had,
     The first delight of ownership is fled.
     He bows his little head.
     Ah, cruel Time, to kill
     That splendid thrill!

     Then in his tear-dimmed eyes
     New lights arise.
     He drops his treasured pennies on the ground,
     They roll and bound
     And scattered, rest.
     Now with what zest
     He runs to find his errant wealth again!

     So unto men
     Doth God, depriving that He may bestow.
     Fame, health and money go,
     But that they may, new found, be newly sweet.
     Yea, at His feet
     Sit, waiting us, to their concealment bid,
     All they, our lovers, whom His Love hath hid.

     Lo, comfort blooms on pain, and peace on strife,
      And gain on loss.
     What is the key to Everlasting Life?
      A blood-stained Cross.




Trees

     (For Mrs. Henry Mills Alden)



     I think that I shall never see
     A poem lovely as a tree.

     A tree whose hungry mouth is prest
     Against the earth's sweet flowing breast;

     A tree that looks at God all day,
     And lifts her leafy arms to pray;

     A tree that may in Summer wear
     A nest of robins in her hair;

     Upon whose bosom snow has lain;
     Who intimately lives with rain.

     Poems are made by fools like me,
     But only God can make a tree.




Stars

     (For the Rev. James J. Daly, S. J.)



     Bright stars, yellow stars, flashing through the air,
     Are you errant strands of Lady Mary's hair?
     As she slits the cloudy veil and bends down through,
     Do you fall across her cheeks and over heaven too?

     Gay stars, little stars, you are little eyes,
     Eyes of baby angels playing in the skies.
     Now and then a winged child turns his merry face
     Down toward the spinning world -- what a funny place!

     Jesus Christ came from the Cross (Christ receive my soul!)
     In each perfect hand and foot there was a bloody hole.
     Four great iron spikes there were, red and never dry,
     Michael plucked them from the Cross and set them in the sky.

     Christ's Troop, Mary's Guard, God's own men,
     Draw your swords and strike at Hell and strike again.
     Every steel-born spark that flies where God's battles are,
     Flashes past the face of God, and is a star.




Old Poets

     (For Robert Cortez Holliday)



     If I should live in a forest
      And sleep underneath a tree,
     No grove of impudent saplings
      Would make a home for me.

     I'd go where the old oaks gather,
      Serene and good and strong,
     And they would not sigh and tremble
      And vex me with a song.

     The pleasantest sort of poet
      Is the poet who's old and wise,
     With an old white beard and wrinkles
      About his kind old eyes.

     For these young flippertigibbets
      A-rhyming their hours away
     They won't be still like honest men
      And listen to what you say.

     The young poet screams forever
      About his sex and his soul;
     But the old man listens, and smokes his pipe,
      And polishes its bowl.

     There should be a club for poets
      Who have come to seventy year.
     They should sit in a great hall drinking
      Red wine and golden beer.

     They would shuffle in of an evening,
      Each one to his cushioned seat,
     And there would be mellow talking
      And silence rich and sweet.

     There is no peace to be taken
      With poets who are young,
     For they worry about the wars to be fought
      And the songs that must be sung.

     But the old man knows that he's in his chair
      And that God's on His throne in the sky.
     So he sits by the fire in comfort
      And he lets the world spin by.




Delicatessen



     Why is that wanton gossip Fame
      So dumb about this man's affairs?
     Why do we titter at his name
      Who come to buy his curious wares?

     Here is a shop of wonderment.
      From every land has come a prize;
     Rich spices from the Orient,
      And fruit that knew Italian skies,

     And figs that ripened by the sea
      In Smyrna, nuts from hot Brazil,
     Strange pungent meats from Germany,
      And currants from a Grecian hill.

     He is the lord of goodly things
      That make the poor man's table gay,
     Yet of his worth no minstrel sings
      And on his tomb there is no bay.

     Perhaps he lives and dies unpraised,
      This trafficker in humble sweets,
     Because his little shops are raised
      By thousands in the city streets.

     Yet stars in greater numbers shine,
      And violets in millions grow,
     And they in many a golden line
      Are sung, as every child must know.

     Perhaps Fame thinks his worried eyes,
      His wrinkled, shrewd, pathetic face,
     His shop, and all he sells and buys
      Are desperately commonplace.

     Well, it is true he has no sword
      To dangle at his booted knees.
     He leans across a slab of board,
      And draws his knife and slices cheese.

     He never heard of chivalry,
      He longs for no heroic times;
     He thinks of pickles, olives, tea,
      And dollars, nickles, cents and dimes.

     His world has narrow walls, it seems;
      By counters is his soul confined;
     His wares are all his hopes and dreams,
      They are the fabric of his mind.

     Yet -- in a room above the store
      There is a woman -- and a child
     Pattered just now across the floor;
      The shopman looked at him and smiled.

     For, once he thrilled with high romance
      And tuned to love his eager voice.
     Like any cavalier of France
      He wooed the maiden of his choice.

     And now deep in his weary heart
      Are sacred flames that whitely burn.
     He has of Heaven's grace a part
      Who loves, who is beloved in turn.

     And when the long day's work is done,
      (How slow the leaden minutes ran!)
     Home, with his wife and little son,
      He is no huckster, but a man!

     And there are those who grasp his hand,
      Who drink with him and wish him well.
     O in no drear and lonely land
      Shall he who honors friendship dwell.

     And in his little shop, who knows
      What bitter games of war are played?
     Why, daily on each corner grows
      A foe to rob him of his trade.

     He fights, and for his fireside's sake;
      He fights for clothing and for bread:
     The lances of his foemen make
      A steely halo round his head.

     He decks his window artfully,
      He haggles over paltry sums.
     In this strange field his war must be
      And by such blows his triumph comes.

     What if no trumpet sounds to call
      His armed legions to his side?
     What if, to no ancestral hall
      He comes in all a victor's pride?

     The scene shall never fit the deed.
      Grotesquely wonders come to pass.
     The fool shall mount an Arab steed
      And Jesus ride upon an ass.

     This man has home and child and wife
      And battle set for every day.
     This man has God and love and life;
      These stand, all else shall pass away.

     O Carpenter of Nazareth,
      Whose mother was a village maid,
     Shall we, Thy children, blow our breath
      In scorn on any humble trade?

     Have pity on our foolishness
      And give us eyes, that we may see
     Beneath the shopman's clumsy dress
      The splendor of humanity!




Servant Girl and Grocer's Boy



     Her lips' remark was:  "Oh, you kid!"
     Her soul spoke thus (I know it did):

     "O king of realms of endless joy,
     My own, my golden grocer's boy,

     I am a princess forced to dwell
     Within a lonely kitchen cell,

     While you go dashing through the land
     With loveliness on every hand.

     Your whistle strikes my eager ears
     Like music of the choiring spheres.

     The mighty earth grows faint and reels
     Beneath your thundering wagon wheels.

     How keenly, perilously sweet
     To cling upon that swaying seat!

     How happy she who by your side
     May share the splendors of that ride!

     Ah, if you will not take my hand
     And bear me off across the land,

     Then, traveller from Arcady,
     Remain awhile and comfort me.

     What other maiden can you find
     So young and delicate and kind?"

     Her lips' remark was:  "Oh, you kid!"
     Her soul spoke thus (I know it did).




Wealth

     (For Aline)



     From what old ballad, or from what rich frame
      Did you descend to glorify the earth?
     Was it from Chaucer's singing book you came?
      Or did Watteau's small brushes give you birth?

     Nothing so exquisite as that slight hand
      Could Raphael or Leonardo trace.
     Nor could the poets know in Fairyland
      The changing wonder of your lyric face.

     I would possess a host of lovely things,
      But I am poor and such joys may not be.
     So God who lifts the poor and humbles kings
      Sent loveliness itself to dwell with me.




Martin



     When I am tired of earnest men,
      Intense and keen and sharp and clever,
     Pursuing fame with brush or pen
      Or counting metal disks forever,
     Then from the halls of Shadowland
      Beyond the trackless purple sea
     Old Martin's ghost comes back to stand
      Beside my desk and talk to me.

     Still on his delicate pale face
      A quizzical thin smile is showing,
     His cheeks are wrinkled like fine lace,
      His kind blue eyes are gay and glowing.
     He wears a brilliant-hued cravat,
      A suit to match his soft grey hair,
     A rakish stick, a knowing hat,
      A manner blithe and debonair.

     How good that he who always knew
      That being lovely was a duty,
     Should have gold halls to wander through
      And should himself inhabit beauty.
     How like his old unselfish way
      To leave those halls of splendid mirth
     And comfort those condemned to stay
      Upon the dull and sombre earth.

     Some people ask:  "What cruel chance
      Made Martin's life so sad a story?"
     Martin?  Why, he exhaled romance,
      And wore an overcoat of glory.
     A fleck of sunlight in the street,
      A horse, a book, a girl who smiled,
     Such visions made each moment sweet
      For this receptive ancient child.

     Because it was old Martin's lot
      To be, not make, a decoration,
     Shall we then scorn him, having not
      His genius of appreciation?
     Rich joy and love he got and gave;
      His heart was merry as his dress;
     Pile laurel wreaths upon his grave
      Who did not gain, but was, success!




The Apartment House



     Severe against the pleasant arc of sky
      The great stone box is cruelly displayed.
      The street becomes more dreary from its shade,
     And vagrant breezes touch its walls and die.
     Here sullen convicts in their chains might lie,
      Or slaves toil dumbly at some dreary trade.
      How worse than folly is their labor made
     Who cleft the rocks that this might rise on high!

     Yet, as I look, I see a woman's face
      Gleam from a window far above the street.
     This is a house of homes, a sacred place,
      By human passion made divinely sweet.
     How all the building thrills with sudden grace
      Beneath the magic of Love's golden feet!




As Winds That Blow Against A Star

     (For Aline)



     Now by what whim of wanton chance
      Do radiant eyes know sombre days?
     And feet that shod in light should dance
      Walk weary and laborious ways?

     But rays from Heaven, white and whole,
      May penetrate the gloom of earth;
     And tears but nourish, in your soul,
      The glory of celestial mirth.

     The darts of toil and sorrow, sent
      Against your peaceful beauty, are
     As foolish and as impotent
      As winds that blow against a star.




St. Laurence



     Within the broken Vatican
      The murdered Pope is lying dead.
     The soldiers of Valerian
      Their evil hands are wet and red.

     Unarmed, unmoved, St. Laurence waits,
      His cassock is his only mail.
     The troops of Hell have burst the gates,
      But Christ is Lord, He shall prevail.

     They have encompassed him with steel,
      They spit upon his gentle face,
     He smiles and bleeds, nor will reveal
      The Church's hidden treasure-place.

     Ah, faithful steward, worthy knight,
      Well hast thou done.  Behold thy fee!
     Since thou hast fought the goodly fight
      A martyr's death is fixed for thee.

     St. Laurence, pray for us to bear
      The faith which glorifies thy name.
     St. Laurence, pray for us to share
      The wounds of Love's consuming flame.




To A Young Poet Who Killed Himself



     When you had played with life a space
      And made it drink and lust and sing,
     You flung it back into God's face
      And thought you did a noble thing.
     "Lo, I have lived and loved," you said,
      "And sung to fools too dull to hear me.
     Now for a cool and grassy bed
      With violets in blossom near me."

     Well, rest is good for weary feet,
      Although they ran for no great prize;
     And violets are very sweet,
      Although their roots are in your eyes.
     But hark to what the earthworms say
      Who share with you your muddy haven:
     "The fight was on -- you ran away.
      You are a coward and a craven.

     "The rug is ruined where you bled;
      It was a dirty way to die!
     To put a bullet through your head
      And make a silly woman cry!
     You could not vex the merry stars
      Nor make them heed you, dead or living.
     Not all your puny anger mars
      God's irresistible forgiving.

     "Yes, God forgives and men forget,
      And you're forgiven and forgotten.
     You might be gaily sinning yet
      And quick and fresh instead of rotten.
     And when you think of love and fame
      And all that might have come to pass,
     Then don't you feel a little shame?
      And don't you think you were an ass?"




Memorial Day

     "Dulce et decorum est"



     The bugle echoes shrill and sweet,
      But not of war it sings to-day.
     The road is rhythmic with the feet
      Of men-at-arms who come to pray.

     The roses blossom white and red
      On tombs where weary soldiers lie;
     Flags wave above the honored dead
      And martial music cleaves the sky.

     Above their wreath-strewn graves we kneel,
      They kept the faith and fought the fight.
     Through flying lead and crimson steel
      They plunged for Freedom and the Right.

     May we, their grateful children, learn
      Their strength, who lie beneath this sod,
     Who went through fire and death to earn
      At last the accolade of God.

     In shining rank on rank arrayed
      They march, the legions of the Lord;
     He is their Captain unafraid,
      The Prince of Peace . . . Who brought a sword.




The Rosary



     Not on the lute, nor harp of many strings
      Shall all men praise the Master of all song.
      Our life is brief, one saith, and art is long;
     And skilled must be the laureates of kings.
     Silent, O lips that utter foolish things!
      Rest, awkward fingers striking all notes wrong!
      How from your toil shall issue, white and strong,
     Music like that God's chosen poet sings?

     There is one harp that any hand can play,
      And from its strings what harmonies arise!
     There is one song that any mouth can say, --
      A song that lingers when all singing dies.
     When on their beads our Mother's children pray
      Immortal music charms the grateful skies.




Vision

     (For Aline)



     Homer, they tell us, was blind and could not see the beautiful faces
      Looking up into his own and reflecting the joy of his dream,
      Yet did he seem
     Gifted with eyes that could follow the gods to their holiest places.

     I have no vision of gods, not of Eros with love-arrows laden,
      Jupiter thundering death or of Juno his white-breasted queen,
      Yet have I seen
     All of the joy of the world in the innocent heart of a maiden.




To Certain Poets



     Now is the rhymer's honest trade
     A thing for scornful laughter made.

     The merchant's sneer, the clerk's disdain,
     These are the burden of our pain.

     Because of you did this befall,
     You brought this shame upon us all.

     You little poets mincing there
     With women's hearts and women's hair!

     How sick Dan Chaucer's ghost must be
     To hear you lisp of "Poesie"!

     A heavy-handed blow, I think,
     Would make your veins drip scented ink.

     You strut and smirk your little while
     So mildly, delicately vile!

     Your tiny voices mock God's wrath,
     You snails that crawl along His path!

     Why, what has God or man to do
     With wet, amorphous things like you?

     This thing alone you have achieved:
     Because of you, it is believed

     That all who earn their bread by rhyme
     Are like yourselves, exuding slime.

     Oh, cease to write, for very shame,
     Ere all men spit upon our name!

     Take up your needles, drop your pen,
     And leave the poet's craft to men!




Love's Lantern

     (For Aline)



     Because the road was steep and long
      And through a dark and lonely land,
     God set upon my lips a song
      And put a lantern in my hand.

     Through miles on weary miles of night
      That stretch relentless in my way
     My lantern burns serene and white,
      An unexhausted cup of day.

     O golden lights and lights like wine,
      How dim your boasted splendors are.
     Behold this little lamp of mine;
      It is more starlike than a star!




St. Alexis

     Patron of Beggars



     We who beg for bread as we daily tread
      Country lane and city street,
     Let us kneel and pray on the broad highway
      To the saint with the vagrant feet.
     Our altar light is a buttercup bright,
      And our shrine is a bank of sod,
     But still we share St. Alexis' care,
      The Vagabond of God.

     They gave him a home in purple Rome
      And a princess for his bride,
     But he rowed away on his wedding day
      Down the Tiber's rushing tide.
     And he came to land on the Asian strand
      Where the heathen people dwell;
     As a beggar he strayed and he preached and prayed
      And he saved their souls from hell.

     Bowed with years and pain he came back again
      To his father's dwelling place.
     There was none to see who this tramp might be,
      For they knew not his bearded face.
     But his father said, "Give him drink and bread
      And a couch underneath the stair."
     So Alexis crept to his hole and slept.
      But he might not linger there.

     For when night came down on the seven-hilled town,
      And the emperor hurried in,
     Saying, "Lo, I hear that a saint is near
      Who will cleanse us of our sin,"
     Then they looked in vain where the saint had lain,
      For his soul had fled afar,
     From his fleshly home he had gone to roam
      Where the gold-paved highways are.

     We who beg for bread as we daily tread
      Country lane and city street,
     Let us kneel and pray on the broad highway
      To the saint with the vagrant feet.
     Our altar light is a buttercup bright,
      And our shrine is a bank of sod,
     But still we share St. Alexis' care,
      The Vagabond of God!




Folly

     (For A. K. K.)



     What distant mountains thrill and glow
      Beneath our Lady Folly's tread?
     Why has she left us, wise in woe,
      Shrewd, practical, uncomforted?
     We cannot love or dream or sing,
      We are too cynical to pray,
     There is no joy in anything
      Since Lady Folly went away.

     Many a knight and gentle maid,
      Whose glory shines from years gone by,
     Through ignorance was unafraid
      And as a fool knew how to die.
     Saint Folly rode beside Jehanne
      And broke the ranks of Hell with her,
     And Folly's smile shone brightly on
      Christ's plaything, Brother Juniper.

     Our minds are troubled and defiled
      By study in a weary school.
     O for the folly of the child!
      The ready courage of the fool!
     Lord, crush our knowledge utterly
      And make us humble, simple men;
     And cleansed of wisdom, let us see
      Our Lady Folly's face again.




Madness

     (For Sara Teasdale)



     The lonely farm, the crowded street,
      The palace and the slum,
     Give welcome to my silent feet
      As, bearing gifts, I come.

     Last night a beggar crouched alone,
      A ragged helpless thing;
     I set him on a moonbeam throne --
      Today he is a king.

     Last night a king in orb and crown
      Held court with splendid cheer;
     Today he tears his purple gown
      And moans and shrieks in fear.

     Not iron bars, nor flashing spears,
      Not land, nor sky, nor sea,
     Nor love's artillery of tears
      Can keep mine own from me.

     Serene, unchanging, ever fair,
      I smile with secret mirth
     And in a net of mine own hair
      I swing the captive earth.




Poets



     Vain is the chiming of forgotten bells
      That the wind sways above a ruined shrine.
     Vainer his voice in whom no longer dwells
      Hunger that craves immortal Bread and Wine.

     Light songs we breathe that perish with our breath
      Out of our lips that have not kissed the rod.
     They shall not live who have not tasted death.
      They only sing who are struck dumb by God.




Citizen of the World



     No longer of Him be it said
     "He hath no place to lay His head."

     In every land a constant lamp
     Flames by His small and mighty camp.

     There is no strange and distant place
     That is not gladdened by His face.

     And every nation kneels to hail
     The Splendour shining through Its veil.

     Cloistered beside the shouting street,
     Silent, He calls me to His feet.

     Imprisoned for His love of me
     He makes my spirit greatly free.

     And through my lips that uttered sin
     The King of Glory enters in.




To a Blackbird and His Mate Who Died in the Spring

     (For Kenton)



     An iron hand has stilled the throats
      That throbbed with loud and rhythmic glee
     And dammed the flood of silver notes
      That drenched the world in melody.
     The blosmy apple boughs are yearning
     For their wild choristers' returning,
      But no swift wings flash through the tree.

     Ye that were glad and fleet and strong,
      Shall Silence take you in her net?
     And shall Death quell that radiant song
      Whose echo thrills the meadow yet?
     Burst the frail web about you clinging
     And charm Death's cruel heart with singing
      Till with strange tears his eyes are wet.

     The scented morning of the year
      Is old and stale now ye are gone.
     No friendly songs the children hear
      Among the bushes on the lawn.
     When babies wander out a-Maying
     Will ye, their bards, afar be straying?
      Unhymned by you, what is the dawn?

     Nay, since ye loved ye cannot die.
      Above the stars is set your nest.
     Through Heaven's fields ye sing and fly
      And in the trees of Heaven rest.
     And little children in their dreaming
     Shall see your soft black plumage gleaming
      And smile, by your clear music blest.




The Fourth Shepherd

     (For Thomas Walsh)



       I


     On nights like this the huddled sheep
      Are like white clouds upon the grass,
     And merry herdsmen guard their sleep
      And chat and watch the big stars pass.

     It is a pleasant thing to lie
      Upon the meadow on the hill
     With kindly fellowship near by
      Of sheep and men of gentle will.

     I lean upon my broken crook
      And dream of sheep and grass and men --
     O shameful eyes that cannot look
      On any honest thing again!

     On bloody feet I clambered down
      And fled the wages of my sin,
     I am the leavings of the town,
      And meanly serve its meanest inn.

     I tramp the courtyard stones in grief,
      While sleep takes man and beast to her.
     And every cloud is calling "Thief!"
      And every star calls "Murderer!"



       II


     The hand of God is sure and strong,
      Nor shall a man forever flee
     The bitter punishment of wrong.
      The wrath of God is over me!

     With ashen bread and wine of tears
      Shall I be solaced in my pain.
     I wear through black and endless years
      Upon my brow the mark of Cain.



       III


     Poor vagabond, so old and mild,
      Will they not keep him for a night?
     And She, a woman great with child,
      So frail and pitiful and white.

     Good people, since the tavern door
      Is shut to you, come here instead.
     See, I have cleansed my stable floor
      And piled fresh hay to make a bed.

     Here is some milk and oaten cake.
      Lie down and sleep and rest you fair,
     Nor fear, O simple folk, to take
      The bounty of a child of care.



       IV


     On nights like this the huddled sheep --
      I never saw a night so fair.
     How huge the sky is, and how deep!
      And how the planets flash and glare!

     At dawn beside my drowsy flock
      What winged music I have heard!
     But now the clouds with singing rock
      As if the sky were turning bird.

     O blinding Light, O blinding Light!
      Burn through my heart with sweetest pain.
     O flaming Song, most loudly bright,
      Consume away my deadly stain!



       V


     The stable glows against the sky,
      And who are these that throng the way?
     My three old comrades hasten by
      And shining angels kneel and pray.

     The door swings wide -- I cannot go --
      I must and yet I dare not see.
     Lord, who am I that I should know --
      Lord, God, be merciful to me!



       VI


     O Whiteness, whiter than the fleece
      Of new-washed sheep on April sod!
     O Breath of Life, O Prince of Peace,
      O Lamb of God, O Lamb of God!




Easter



     The air is like a butterfly
      With frail blue wings.
     The happy earth looks at the sky
      And sings.




Mount Houvenkopf



     Serene he stands, with mist serenely crowned,
      And draws a cloak of trees about his breast.
      The thunder roars but cannot break his rest
     And from his rugged face the tempests bound.
     He does not heed the angry lightning's wound,
      The raging blizzard is his harmless guest,
      And human life is but a passing jest
     To him who sees Time spin the years around.

     But fragile souls, in skyey reaches find
      High vantage-points and view him from afar.
     How low he seems to the ascended mind,
      How brief he seems where all things endless are;
     This little playmate of the mighty wind
      This young companion of an ancient star.




The House with Nobody in It



     Whenever I walk to Suffern along the Erie track
     I go by a poor old farmhouse with its shingles broken and black.
     I suppose I've passed it a hundred times, but I always stop for a minute
     And look at the house, the tragic house, the house with nobody in it.

     I never have seen a haunted house, but I hear there are such things;
     That they hold the talk of spirits, their mirth and sorrowings.
     I know this house isn't haunted, and I wish it were, I do;
     For it wouldn't be so lonely if it had a ghost or two.

     This house on the road to Suffern needs a dozen panes of glass,
     And somebody ought to weed the walk and take a scythe to the grass.
     It needs new paint and shingles, and the vines should be trimmed and tied;
     But what it needs the most of all is some people living inside.

     If I had a lot of money and all my debts were paid
     I'd put a gang of men to work with brush and saw and spade.
     I'd buy that place and fix it up the way it used to be
     And I'd find some people who wanted a home and give it to them free.

     Now, a new house standing empty, with staring window and door,
     Looks idle, perhaps, and foolish, like a hat on its block in the store.
     But there's nothing mournful about it; it cannot be sad and lone
     For the lack of something within it that it has never known.

     But a house that has done what a house should do,
       a house that has sheltered life,
     That has put its loving wooden arms around a man and his wife,
     A house that has echoed a baby's laugh and held up his stumbling feet,
     Is the saddest sight, when it's left alone, that ever your eyes could meet.

     So whenever I go to Suffern along the Erie track
     I never go by the empty house without stopping and looking back,
     Yet it hurts me to look at the crumbling roof and the shutters fallen apart,
     For I can't help thinking the poor old house is a house with a broken heart.




Dave Lilly



     There's a brook on the side of Greylock that used to be full of trout,
     But there's nothing there now but minnows; they say it is all fished out.
     I fished there many a Summer day some twenty years ago,
     And I never quit without getting a mess of a dozen or so.

     There was a man, Dave Lilly, who lived on the North Adams road,
     And he spent all his time fishing, while his neighbors reaped and sowed.
     He was the luckiest fisherman in the Berkshire hills, I think.
     And when he didn't go fishing he'd sit in the tavern and drink.

     Well, Dave is dead and buried and nobody cares very much;
     They have no use in Greylock for drunkards and loafers and such.
     But I always liked Dave Lilly, he was pleasant as you could wish;
     He was shiftless and good-for-nothing, but he certainly could fish.

     The other night I was walking up the hill from Williamstown
     And I came to the brook I mentioned,
       and I stopped on the bridge and sat down.
     I looked at the blackened water with its little flecks of white
     And I heard it ripple and whisper in the still of the Summer night.

     And after I'd been there a minute it seemed to me I could feel
     The presence of someone near me, and I heard the hum of a reel.
     And the water was churned and broken, and something was brought to land
     By a twist and flirt of a shadowy rod in a deft and shadowy hand.

     I scrambled down to the brookside and hunted all about;
     There wasn't a sign of a fisherman; there wasn't a sign of a trout.
     But I heard somebody chuckle behind the hollow oak
     And I got a whiff of tobacco like Lilly used to smoke.

     It's fifteen years, they tell me, since anyone fished that brook;
     And there's nothing in it but minnows that nibble the bait off your hook.
     But before the sun has risen and after the moon has set
     I know that it's full of ghostly trout for Lilly's ghost to get.

     I guess I'll go to the tavern and get a bottle of rye
     And leave it down by the hollow oak, where Lilly's ghost went by.
     I meant to go up on the hillside and try to find his grave
     And put some flowers on it -- but this will be better for Dave.




Alarm Clocks



     When Dawn strides out to wake a dewy farm
      Across green fields and yellow hills of hay
      The little twittering birds laugh in his way
     And poise triumphant on his shining arm.
     He bears a sword of flame but not to harm
      The wakened life that feels his quickening sway
      And barnyard voices shrilling "It is day!"
     Take by his grace a new and alien charm.

     But in the city, like a wounded thing
      That limps to cover from the angry chase,
     He steals down streets where sickly arc-lights sing,
      And wanly mock his young and shameful face;
     And tiny gongs with cruel fervor ring
      In many a high and dreary sleeping place.




Waverley

     1814-1914



     When, on a novel's newly printed page
      We find a maudlin eulogy of sin,
      And read of ways that harlots wander in,
     And of sick souls that writhe in helpless rage;
     Or when Romance, bespectacled and sage,
      Taps on her desk and bids the class begin
      To con the problems that have always been
     Perplexed mankind's unhappy heritage;

     Then in what robes of honor habited
      The laureled wizard of the North appears!
     Who raised Prince Charlie's cohorts from the dead,
      Made Rose's mirth and Flora's noble tears,
     And formed that shining legion at whose head
      Rides Waverley, triumphant o'er the years!


